
===PAGE 1===
JANUARY | 2022
© Andy Piatt/Shutterstock.com
Prescription Drugs: 
Spending, Use, and Prices

===PAGE 2===
At a Glance
In recent years, policymakers have expressed concerns about the high prices of prescription drugs. 
Those drugs offer wide-ranging benefits, such as reducing the need for services provided by physicians 
and hospitals, improving the quality of life, and extending life. However, high prices reduce 
consumers’ access to such medications. They also contribute to higher spending that strains budgets, 
including the federal budget. 
In this report, the Congressional Budget Office examines trends in nationwide spending on 
prescription drugs over the 1980–2018 period. The report also provides a more detailed analysis 
of trends in spending, use, and prices in the Medicare Part D and Medicaid programs over the 
2009–2018 period. 
• Spending on Prescription Drugs. After decades of increases, per capita spending on prescription 
drugs began to level off in real terms (that is, with the effects of economywide inflation excluded) 
in the mid-2000s. Since that time, such spending has fallen as a percentage of total spending on 
health care services and supplies. That slower growth in spending is associated with the growing 
availability of generic drugs, which tend to have much lower prices than their brand-name 
counterparts. 
The period from 2013 to 2015 was an exception; during that time, spending on prescription drugs 
increased sharply, both in dollar terms and as a share of total spending on health care services and 
supplies. Although per enrollee spending in Medicare Part D was fairly stable from 2009 to 2018, 
per enrollee spending in Medicaid increased somewhat faster than nationwide per capita spending 
over that period.
• Use of Prescription Drugs. Consumers’ use of prescription drugs has increased over time. Greater 
use of generic drugs is a key factor in that increase.
• Prices of Prescription Drugs. The average net price of a prescription—that is, the price of a 
prescription after subtracting the discounts and rebates that manufacturers provide to private 
insurers and federal programs—fell from $57 in 2009 to $50 in 2018 in the Medicare Part D 
program and from $63 to $48 in the Medicaid program. That trend reflects the increased use of 
lower-cost generic drugs, which was partially offset by rising prices for brand-name drugs. The 
average net price of brand-name prescription drugs increased substantially over that period: from 
$149 to $353 in Medicare Part D and from $147 to $218 in Medicaid. Average prices for generic 
drugs in Medicare Part D and Medicaid fell over that period. Nationwide changes in average 
prices—overall and for both brand-name drugs and generic drugs—probably followed similar 
patterns.
www.cbo.gov/publication/57050
===PAGE 3===
Contents
Summary 1
What Are Recent Trends in Spending for Prescription Drugs? 1
How Has the Use of Prescription Drugs Changed Over Time? 2
How Has the Average Price of a Prescription Changed Over Time? 2
Trends in Spending for Prescription Drugs  3
Nationwide Spending on Prescription Drugs 3
Medicare and Medicaid Spending on Prescription Drugs 8
Trends in the Use of Prescription Drugs 9
Underlying Drivers of Increased Use 9
Factors Contributing to Changes in the Use of Generic Drugs 10
Trends in the Average Price of a Prescription  12
Comparing Prices Among Payers 13
Prices for Brand-Name Drugs 15
Prices for Generic Drugs 22
List of Figures 24
About This Document 25
Boxes
1. The Flow of Payments and Products in Prescription Drug Markets 6
2. Diverging Trends in Retail and Net Prices 18
3. The Profitability of Manufacturers of Brand-Name Drugs 20
===PAGE 4===
Notes
T o remove the effects of general inflation when comparing prices and spending over time, all 
estimates of drug spending and prices in this report have been adjusted to 2018 dollars using the 
gross domestic product price index from the Bureau of Economic Analysis. 
Unless otherwise indicated, all drug spending totals are based on net prices. Net drug spending 
and net prices include the total amount paid to a pharmacy less any discounts and rebates that 
manufacturers and pharmacies provide to “payers” (such as commercial and government-sponsored 
health insurance plans and the Medicaid program). In the case of Medicare Part D, those rebates and 
discounts include statutory discounts in the coverage gap. Because the Congressional Budget Office 
could not obtain data on the rebates and discounts paid for generic drugs in the Medicare Part D 
program, rebates and discounts for generic drugs were not subtracted from drug spending totals and 
net prices for that program.
For the analysis underlying this report, CBO used data from the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid 
Services. Spending totals, prescription counts, and average prices for prescription drugs in the 
Medicare Part D program were derived from data from the Part D Event File; those data were 
combined with detailed data on the rebates that Medicare Part D plans receive from manufacturers 
and pharmacies for brand-name drugs. For the Medicaid program, those values were derived from 
the State Drug Utilization Data and data on statutory Medicaid rebate amounts. Medicaid spending 
reflects total program spending, including both federal and nonfederal contributions.
Unless this report specifies otherwise, all discussions about prescription drugs—and all dollar 
amounts—pertain to drugs purchased in retail settings, such as local pharmacies or mail-order 
pharmacies, and exclude drugs that are administered in physicians’ offices or hospitals. (In some cases, 
Medicaid’s administrative data include drugs that are administered in physicians’ offices; those drugs 
are included in this analysis.)
All prescription counts and average prices for medications obtained through Medicare Part D have 
been adjusted to reflect standardized 30-day prescriptions. Any prescription for which the number of 
days supplied is less than or equal to 30 counts as a single standardized prescription; for prescriptions 
in which the number of days supplied exceeds 30, the number of standardized prescriptions is equal 
to the number of days supplied divided by 30. For example, a prescription that has a 90-day supply 
equals three standardized prescriptions. Prescription counts and average prices for medications 
obtained through Medicaid were not adjusted for duration of supply because that information is not 
included in the Medicaid data.
CBO has corrected this report since its original publication. Corrections are listed at the end of the 
report.
===PAGE 5===
Prescription Drugs:  
Spending, Use, and Prices
Summary
Prescription drugs have become an increasingly import-
ant part of U.S. health care, as evidenced by the growth 
in nationwide spending on those drugs from 1980 
to 2018.1 Over that period, such spending increased 
more than tenfold in real terms (that is, with the effects 
of economywide inflation excluded). This report by 
the Congressional Budget Office discusses trends in 
nationwide spending on prescription drugs in the retail 
market from 1980 to 2018. It also presents a detailed 
analysis of trends in spending, use, and prices in the 
Medicare Part D and Medicaid programs over the 
2009–2018 period. 
What Are Recent Trends in Spending for 
Prescription Drugs?
Nationwide spending on prescription drugs increased 
from $30 billion in 1980 to $335 billion in 2018. (All 
estimates of drug spending and prices in this report are 
expressed in 2018 dollars.) Over that period, real per 
capita spending on prescription drugs increased more 
than sevenfold: from $140 to $1,073.2 That increase 
in spending was driven by the development and use of 
many types of drugs that have yielded myriad health 
benefits. Because of those health benefits, some drugs, 
such as those that treat cardiovascular conditions, are 
associated with reductions in spending on services pro-
vided by hospitals and physicians.3 Other types of drugs, 
such as those that treat multiple sclerosis or cancer, may 
not offer such compensating savings, but they have 
improved the lives of those with chronic conditions and 
have also extended life. 
1. When CBO conducted its analysis, 2018 was the most recent 
year for which data were available.
2. In this report, “per capita” is used to describe averages for the 
nationwide population, whereas “per enrollee” is used to describe 
averages for enrollees in Medicare Part D or in Medicaid.
3. See David M. Cutler and others, “Explaining the Slowdown in 
Medical Spending Growth Among the Elderly, 1999–2012,” 
Health Affairs, vol. 38, no. 2 (February 2019), pp. 222–229, 
www.healthaffairs.org/doi/10.1377/hlthaff.2018.05372.
Spending on prescription drugs increased particularly 
rapidly after the mid-1990s with an increase in the 
number of drugs that attained “blockbuster” status by 
generating at least $1 billion in sales annually. Those 
blockbuster drugs generally treat conditions, such as high 
cholesterol or high blood pressure, that affect a large 
segment of the population. 
Aside from a pronounced increase between 2013 and 
2015, spending on prescription drugs has grown more 
slowly since the mid-2000s. That slower growth in 
spending—and the accompanying reduction in per cap-
ita spending—is associated with the growing availability 
of generic drugs, which tend to have much lower prices 
than their brand-name counterparts. The brief, sharp 
increase in spending between 2013 and 2015 coincided 
with the introduction of a particularly expensive class of 
drugs that treat hepatitis C. 
Although per enrollee spending in Medicare Part D—
Medicare’s pharmaceutical benefit—was fairly stable 
from 2009 to 2018, per enrollee spending in Medicaid 
increased somewhat faster than nationwide per cap-
ita spending over that period. Per enrollee spending 
on prescription drugs in Medicare Part D averaged 
about $2,700 per year. Annual per enrollee spending in 
Medicaid increased over that period by 20 percent, from 
$445 to $530, whereas nationwide per capita spending 
increased by 10 percent. 
Differences in average spending among enrollees in 
Medicare and Medicaid and the nation as a whole most 
likely stemmed from differences in the health profiles of 
their respective patient populations and statutory rebates 
in the Medicaid program. (Those rebates represent 
payments from drug manufacturers to “payers,” such as 
commercial and government-sponsored health insurance 
plans and the Medicaid program.) Medicare beneficiaries 
are more likely to be prescribed medications for various 
chronic conditions, whereas many Medicaid beneficia-
ries who have prescription drug coverage through that 

===PAGE 6===
2 PRESCRIPTION DRUGS: SPENDING, USE, AND PRICES JANUARy 2022
program are younger and healthier and therefore are less 
likely to have medications prescribed for them on an 
ongoing basis.
How Has the Use of Prescription Drugs 
Changed Over Time?
Nationwide per capita use of prescription drugs has 
increased in recent years. Per enrollee use of prescrip-
tion drugs has also increased in Medicare Part D and 
Medicaid—from an average of 48 prescriptions per year 
in 2009 to 54 in 2018 in Medicare Part D, and from 
7 prescriptions per year to 11 in Medicaid over that 
period. Increased use of prescription drugs is primarily 
associated with the increasing availability and use of 
generic drugs, along with the continued development of 
new treatments. In addition, the share of spending on 
prescription drugs that insurers cover has increased sub-
stantially: In 1990, consumers paid 57 percent of their 
prescription drug costs out of pocket, on average. By 
2009, that share had fallen to 20 percent; it fell further, 
to 15 percent, in 2018. 
The share of prescriptions for generic drugs has also 
increased substantially. Nationwide, that share increased 
from 75 percent in 2009 to 90 percent in 2018. In 
Medicare Part D, the share of prescriptions for generic 
drugs increased from 72 percent to 90 percent between 
2009 and 2018; in Medicaid, it increased from 70 per-
cent to 87 percent over that period. Increased use of 
generic drugs is attributable to several factors: their grow-
ing availability; their lower prices; and the lower out-
of-pocket liability for consumers with health insurance 
compared with the amount people would pay for brand-
name drugs. The share of prescriptions for generic drugs 
may be less likely to rise in the future, both because the 
90 percent dispensing rate for such drugs is already high 
and because newer brand-name drugs tend to be more 
costly to manufacture and may be more challenging to 
replicate as generic drugs. 
How Has the Average Price of a Prescription 
Changed Over Time?
The average price of a prescription has fallen in both the 
Medicare Part D and Medicaid programs in recent years: 
from $57 in 2009 to $50 in 2018 in Medicare Part D 
and from $63 to $48 in Medicaid over that period. 
Those decreases were largely driven by the increased 
use of generic drugs in those programs. The growing 
use of generic drugs has put downward pressure on the 
nationwide average price of a prescription in recent years 
as well. 
Brand-name drugs, while accounting for a declining 
share of prescriptions, have experienced substantial 
growth in average prices. Over the 2009–2018 period, 
the average price of a prescription for a brand-name drug 
more than doubled in the Medicare Part D program and 
increased by 50 percent in Medicaid. T wo key drivers of 
those increases were higher launch prices for new drugs 
and growth in the prices of individual drugs already on 
the market. The growing shift toward specialty drugs 
among new drug entrants was an important factor in the 
increased launch prices of new drugs. (Specialty drugs, 
which treat complex, chronic, or rare conditions—such 
as different types of cancer, rheumatoid arthritis, or mul-
tiple sclerosis—tend to be costly to manufacture, serve 
relatively small markets, and have high prices. They may 
also require special handling or patient monitoring.)4 
Federal policies have also played a role in the pricing 
patterns for brand-name drugs. For example, Medicaid’s 
statutory rebates create an incentive for manufacturers 
to negotiate higher prices for commercial insurers as well 
as higher marketwide launch prices. (However, those 
rebates also create an incentive for manufacturers to 
increase prices more slowly over time, which probably 
mitigates the effect of higher initial prices.) In addition, 
the increase in the share of overall drug spending that 
is covered by Medicare and Medicaid may dampen the 
pressure on manufacturers to restrain prices because 
patients are more willing to purchase high-priced drugs 
when they have less exposure to those prices.
Unlike prices for brand-name drugs, average prices for 
generic drugs have fallen in recent years. From 2009 to 
2018, the average price of a prescription for a generic 
drug fell from $22 to $17 in Medicare Part D and from 
$27 to $23 in Medicaid. Although the federal govern-
ment and nearly all of the states have pursued legal 
action against several generic drug manufacturers for 
price fixing and other anticompetitive behavior, prices 
have probably increased for only a minority of generic 
4. Different companies and different analysts use varied criteria to 
define specialty drugs. CBO uses the definition developed by 
IQVIA Institute for Human Data Science, a health information 
technology company. For more information on that definition 
and how CBO has followed it, see Congressional Budget Office, 
A Comparison of Brand-Name Drug Prices Among Selected Federal 
Programs (February 2021), www.cbo.gov/publication/56978.

===PAGE 7===
3
JANUARy 2022 PRESCRIPTION DRUGS: SPENDING, USE, AND PRICES
drugs that represent a relatively small share of spending 
on prescription drugs.
Trends in Spending for 
Prescription Drugs 
From 1980 until the mid-2000s, spending on prescrip-
tion drugs increased steadily—both in dollar terms and 
as a share of overall health care spending. That growth 
was driven by increases in the availability and use of 
different types of new drug therapies along with increas-
ing prices of brand-name drugs. However, after the 
mid-2000s, the increasing availability and use of generic 
drugs put downward pressure on spending growth. 
Nationwide, real per capita spending and the share of 
overall health care spending attributable to prescription 
drugs began to decrease in the mid-2000s, with the 
exception of a sharp increase from 2013 to 2015. That 
increase coincided with the introduction of a particularly 
expensive class of drugs that are used to treat hepatitis C. 
Per enrollee spending was relatively flat in the Medicare 
Part D program from 2009 to 2018, whereas Medicaid’s 
per enrollee drug spending grew over that period.
Nationwide Spending on Prescription Drugs
Since 1980, the share of nationwide spending on health 
care services overall that can be attributed to prescrip-
tion drugs has nearly doubled, from about 5 percent to 
almost 10 percent in 2018. Through the 1980s and early 
1990s, 5 percent to 6 percent of all spending on health 
care services and supplies was on prescription drugs 
obtained in the retail market (that is, from pharmacies—
either in stores or by mail order). By 2018, that share 
was 10 percent (see Figure 1). In comparison, the share 
of spending on health care services and supplies that was 
attributable to hospital services fell from 40 percent in 
1980 to 31 percent in 2018, and the share attributable to 
services provided by medical professionals and in clinical 
settings was about 20 percent over that period. 
Nationwide per capita spending on prescription drugs 
increased from $140 in 1980 to $1,073 in 2018 (see 
Figure 2).5 (Those spending amounts are net of rebates 
5. Those spending figures come from the National Health 
Expenditure Accounts (NHEA), which report total spending on 
prescription drugs purchased at retail or mail-order pharmacies, 
minus the rebates that drug manufacturers pay to pharmacy 
benefit managers and health insurance plans. The spending 
figures are adjusted to account for inflation using the gross 
domestic product price index from the Bureau of Economic 
Analysis and are expressed in 2018 dollars. For more information 
on how NHEA data are constructed, see National Health 
and discounts. For background information on rebates, 
negotiations, and other attributes of pharmaceutical 
markets, see Box 1 on page 6.) Per capita spending 
on prescription drugs roughly doubled every 10 years 
before slowing down in the mid-2000s. 
Although this report focuses on prescription drugs 
obtained through the retail market, spending on pre-
scription drugs purchased in nonretail settings—such 
as physicians’ offices, clinics, and hospitals—represents 
a substantial share of overall spending on prescription 
drugs. A recent estimate suggests that nonretail drugs 
represented approximately 30 percent of overall net 
spending on prescription drugs in the United States 
in 2016.6 The general pattern of total drug spending 
over the period studied in this report is similar when 
those other sources and types of prescription drugs are 
included.7
Trends in Spending Over the 1995–2013 Period. 
Spending on prescription drugs rose particularly rapidly 
after 1995 as a number of drugs reached blockbuster 
status.8 That wave of blockbuster drugs consisted of top 
sellers that were in high demand because they offered 
Statistics Group, Office of the Actuary, Centers for Medicare 
& Medicaid Services, National Health Expenditure Accounts: 
Methodology Paper, 2020—Definitions, Sources, and Methods 
(2020), https://go.usa.gov//xswJJ (PDF , 621 KB).
6. In that estimate, gross margins were projected to be the same 
in retail and nonretail settings—in other words, the percentage 
difference between a provider’s or pharmacy’s revenues and 
invoice costs for prescription drugs was the same, on average, in 
those two types of settings. See Charles Roehrig, Projections of the 
Prescription Drug Share of National Health Expenditures Including 
Non-Retail (Altarum, May 2018), https://tinyurl.com/d62yuens 
(PDF , 1.87 MB).
7. IQVIA is another commonly cited data source for spending 
on prescription drugs. That company’s data report spending 
on prescription drugs from all channels, including those 
administered in hospitals and physicians’ offices. Those data 
do not include markups along the distribution chain, such as 
dispensing fees or wholesalers’ markups. As a result, it is difficult 
to directly compare IQVIA data with NHEA data. For IQVIA’s 
data on prescription drug spending over a recent 10-year period, 
see IQVIA Institute for Human Data Science, Medicine Use and 
Spending in the U.S.: A Review of 2018 and Outlook to 2023 
(May 2019), https://tinyurl.com/byjnzd7.
8. See Murray Aitkin, Ernst R. Berndt, and David M. Cutler, 
“Prescription Drug Spending T rends in the United States: 
Looking Beyond the T urning Point,” Health Affairs, 
vol. 27 (2008), pp. w151–w160, https://www.healthaffairs.org/
doi/10.1377/hlthaff.28.1.w151.

===PAGE 8===
4 PRESCRIPTION DRUGS: SPENDING, USE, AND PRICES JANUARy 2022
new treatments for relatively common health condi-
tions. The most prominent of those drugs were statins 
for high cholesterol, ACE inhibitors for high blood 
pressure, proton-pump inhibitors for acid reflux and 
gastric ulcers, and antidepressants and antipsychotics 
for mental illnesses. When the patents on those drugs 
began to expire—an event often referred to as the patent 
cliff—lower-priced generic substitutes were introduced 
and gained market share.9 In the midst of that shift, 
the Medicare Part D program was created, which both 
increased access to prescription drugs for Medicare ben-
eficiaries and contributed to the shift from brand-name 
drugs to generic alternatives.10 As a result, per capita 
9. Since 1995, U.S. patents have been granted for 20 years from the 
date of filing. With time for processing the patent application 
and, in particular, for testing a new drug and gaining approval 
from the Food and Drug Administration to market it, the 
effective life of a drug patent is often about 10 years.
10. Most Part D plans have a benefit design that includes lower 
out-of-pocket costs for generic drugs. See Murray Aitkin, 
Ernst R. Berndt, and David M. Cutler, “Prescription Drug 
Spending T rends in the United States: Looking Beyond the 
T urning Point,” Health Affairs, vol. 27 (2008), pp. w151–w160, 
www.healthaffairs.org/doi/10.1377/hlthaff.28.1.w151. 
spending on prescription drugs leveled off at about 
$940 in the mid-2000s and then fell to $900 by 2013, 
and the share of overall health care spending for prescrip-
tion drugs peaked at 10.5 percent in 2006 and then fell 
to 9.2 percent in 2013. 
Trends in Spending Since 2013. Spending on prescrip-
tion drugs increased again over the 2013–2015 period 
before leveling off thereafter. A key factor in that increase 
was the introduction, at the end of 2013, of a class of 
specialty drugs that treat hepatitis C. The drugs for 
hepatitis C were introduced at particularly high prices.11 
Insurers and patients may have been willing to pay 
those prices because of the enormous clinical benefits 
those drugs offer when compared with older therapies 
11. For example, Sovaldi was launched in December 2013 with a list 
price of $84,000 for a standard 12-week regimen, and Harvoni 
was launched in October 2014 with a list price of $94,500 for 
a standard 12-week regimen. Viekira Pak was launched soon 
after, in December 2014, with a list price of $83,319 for a 
standard 12-week regimen. See Medicaid and CHIP Payment 
and Access Commission, High-Cost HCV Drugs in Medicaid: 
Final Report (prepared by Brian Bruen and others, January 2017), 
https://go.usa.gov/xswhd.
Figure 1 .
Spending on Prescription Drugs Purchased From Pharmacies as a  
Share of Total Spending on Health Care Services and Supplies
Percent
0
4
8
12
1982 1988 1994 2000 2006 2012 2018
From 1980 to 2018, the 
availability and use of 
different types of new 
drug therapies, along with 
rising prices for brand-
name drugs, contributed to 
increases in spending on 
prescription drugs. At the 
same time, the availability 
and use of generic drugs  
put downward pressure on 
such spending.
Data source: Congressional Budget Office, using data from Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, National Health Expenditure Data, Historical, 
National Health Expenditures by Type of Service and Source of Funds: Calendar years 1960 to 2019, entries for “Prescription Drugs” and “Total National Health 
Expenditures” (accessed December 10, 2021), https://go.usa.gov/xASdV. See www.cbo.gov/publication/57050#data.
Spending on prescription drugs is net of rebates paid by manufacturers to payers, such as commercial and government-sponsored health insurance plans and 
the Medicaid program. 
Data for prescription drug spending exclude spending on drugs that are administered in physicians’ offices or hospital settings. 

===PAGE 9===
5
JANUARy 2022 PRESCRIPTION DRUGS: SPENDING, USE, AND PRICES
(they successfully treat about 95 percent of patients with 
chronic hepatitis C infection) and the stiff demand for 
that kind of therapy.12 However, the patient popula-
tion for that class of drugs is larger than that for many 
specialty drugs, leading to a larger impact on spending 
than would have occurred for a similarly priced drug that 
treats a smaller patient population. 
Implementation of the insurance expansions under the 
Affordable Care Act (ACA) also occurred during this 
period.13 Researchers have found that new take-up of 
Medicaid in states that expanded coverage under the 
12. See Department of Veterans Affairs, “Hepatitis C 
Medications: An Overview for Patients” (accessed March 16, 
2021), https://go.usa.gov/xs7qe.
13. As referred to in this report, the Affordable Care Act comprises 
the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (Public Law 
111-148), the health care provisions of the Health Care and 
Education Reconciliation Act of 2010 (P .L. 111-152), and the 
effects of subsequent judicial decisions, statutory changes, and 
administrative actions.
terms of the ACA was associated with greater use of 
prescription drugs because those benefits reduced out-
of-pocket spending for the previously uninsured and 
also tended to be more generous than previous sources 
of coverage.14 Take-up of marketplace health insurance 
options under the insurance expansions may have been 
associated with a similar response. However, overall use 
of prescriptions in the Medicaid program did not grow 
faster in the years immediately following the insurance 
expansions than it did in prior years, suggesting that 
the expansions were not a key driver of the increase in 
spending on prescription drugs over that period.15
14. See Ausmita Ghosh, Kosali Simon, and Benjamin D. Sommers, 
“The Effect of Health Insurance on Prescription Drug Use 
Among Low-Income Adults: Evidence From Recent Medicaid 
Expansions,” Journal of Health Economics, vol. 63 (January 2019), 
pp. 64–80, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhealeco.2018.11.002. 
15. See IQVIA Institute for Human Data Science, Medicines Use 
and Spending in the U.S.: A Review of 2016 and Outlook to 2021 
(May 2017), Chart 8, https://tinyurl.com/32ea3225. 
Figure 2 .
Total Nationwide Spending, per Capita, on Prescription Drugs 
Purchased From Pharmacies
2018 Dollars
0
200
400
600
800
1,000
1,200
1982 1988 1994 2000 2006 2012 2018
Growth in per capita 
spending on prescription 
drugs began to slow in the 
mid-2000s, coinciding with 
the increasing availability 
and use of lower-priced 
generic drugs. However, 
the introduction of a 
particularly expensive class 
of drugs that are used to 
treat hepatitis C led to a 
sharp increase in per capita 
spending from 2013 to 2015.
Data source: Congressional Budget Office, using data from Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, National Health Expenditure Data, Historical, 
National Health Expenditures by Type of Service and Source of Funds: Calendar years 1960 to 2019, entries for “Prescription Drugs” and “Population” 
(accessed December 10, 2021), https://go.usa.gov/xASdV. See www.cbo.gov/publication/57050#data.
Spending on prescription drugs is net of rebates paid by manufacturers to payers, such as commercial and government-sponsored health insurance plans and 
the Medicaid program. 
Data for prescription drug spending exclude spending on drugs that are administered in physicians’ offices or hospital settings. 
To remove the effects of general inflation when comparing prices and spending over time, estimates of spending on prescription drugs have been adjusted to 
2018 dollars using the gross domestic product price index from the Bureau of Economic Analysis.

===PAGE 10===
6 PRESCRIPTION DRUGS: SPENDING, USE, AND PRICES JANUARy 2022
Box 1 .
The Flow of Payments and Products in Prescription Drug Markets
Markets for prescription drugs purchased at pharmacies in the 
United States are served by a complex supply chain, with pay-
ment flows involving multiple actors, including intermediaries 
(such as pharmacy benefit managers, or PBMs, which negoti-
ate prices but do not distribute or dispense the products). The 
supply process begins with pharmaceutical manufacturers 
selling their output to wholesale distributors. The distributors 
resell those drugs to pharmacies, at prices that may have 
been negotiated by group-purchasing organizations on behalf 
of members, including pharmacies. Pharmacies package the 
drugs into prescriptions and sell them a third time, to consum-
ers. As a result, the concept of “price” differs depending on the 
entity that is receiving payment—or paying—for a prescription.
Payments That Pharmacies Receive
The retail price of a drug at the pharmacy counter is deter-
mined by negotiations between pharmacies and insurers (or 
their PBMs) and reflects both wholesale and retail markups. 
Those markups compensate the wholesaler and pharmacy, 
respectively, for the services they provide and for their inven-
tory costs. The retail price of a given drug is probably similar 
for most payers.1 (Payers are the entities that pay for prescrip-
tion drugs, namely commercial insurers and federal health care 
programs, as well as individuals without insurance coverage 
for prescription drugs.) Consumers who have not yet satisfied 
their insurance plan’s annual deductible pay that retail price or 
possibly much less if the manufacturer has a coupon program 
for that drug and the consumer is eligible for the program. (A 
deductible is the amount of spending an enrollee incurs before 
an insurer begins covering expenses.) Consumers with health 
insurance who have met their deductible pay only a portion 
of the retail price, as specified by their plan’s copayment or 
coinsurance schedule; the remainder is paid by their plan or 
its PBM. (A copayment is a specified dollar amount that an 
enrollee pays at the time a drug is purchased. Coinsurance is 
cost sharing in the form of a set percentage of the drug’s cost.) 
Consumers without insurance may pay a pharmacy’s “usual 
and customary” price—which tends to be higher than the retail 
1. The Congressional Budget Office found that retail prices for a given basket 
of drugs were very similar for Medicare and Medicaid. See Congressional 
Budget Office, A Comparison of Brand-Name Drug Prices Among Selected 
Federal Programs (February 2021), www.cbo.gov/publication/56978.
prices paid by other payers—or may pay a discounted amount 
using a coupon program such as GoodRx.2
Prices That Insurers Pay
For insurance plans, a drug’s retail price bears little relation 
to the plan’s costs for prescription drug claims, especially in 
the case of brand-name drugs. The actual price to the insurer 
is largely determined by the rebate, the negotiated payment 
it later receives from the manufacturer. (Manufacturers of 
generic drugs generally do not offer rebates to insurance 
plans, although they pay rebates to pharmacies.)3 The size of 
the rebate, which varies by drug, health insurance plan, and 
enrollees’ total purchases of the drug in that plan, is nego-
tiated in advance by the insurer or the insurer’s PBM. (That 
process is described below in the section titled “Negotiations 
With Manufacturers.”) 
For brand-name drugs, the PBM may achieve its markup by 
retaining a small portion of the manufacturer’s rebate, with 
the remainder going to the insurer or payer. The insurer, in 
turn, shares most of the rebate with its enrollees in the form 
of lower premiums or more generous benefits on its insurance 
coverage.4 For generic drugs, there is generally no rebate to 
share; consequently, the PBM may mark up the net prices of 
those drugs or may instead charge the plans higher fees for its 
administrative services.
Negotiations With Manufacturers. The process by which 
net prices are negotiated is similar for most insurance plans, 
2. See Adam J. Fein, “How GoodRx Profits From Our Broken Pharmacy Pricing 
System” (blog entry, August 31, 2020), https://tinyurl.com/2dh6hxyw.  
3. Unlike rebates for brand-name drugs, those rebates do not reduce net 
costs to plans because they are paid to pharmacies or wholesalers rather 
than to plans or PBMs. See Steven M. Lieberman and Paul B. Ginsburg, 
Would Price Transparency for Generic Drugs Lower Costs for Payers 
and Patients? (Leonard D. Schaeffer Center for Health Policy and 
Economics and the Center for Health Policy at Brookings, June 2017), 
https://tinyurl.com/2mczpcxs.
4. PBMs have recently reported that 90 percent of rebates are passed through 
to insurers and plan sponsors, though small insurers and employers 
have reported that they receive smaller shares of rebates. See Elizabeth 
Seeley and Aaron S. Kesselheim, Pharmacy Benefit Managers: Practices, 
Controversies, and What Lies Ahead (Commonwealth Fund, March 2019), 
https://tinyurl.com/b7xh8vup (PDF, 405 KB).
Continued

===PAGE 11===
7
JANUARy 2022 PRESCRIPTION DRUGS: SPENDING, USE, AND PRICES
although the net prices themselves can vary widely across 
those plans. A PBM bargains with a manufacturer for a larger 
rebate on a drug in exchange for preferred placement of that 
drug in a plan’s formulary (or list of covered drugs). Those 
negotiations may also include stronger restrictions on—or 
exclusion of—competing drugs as well as “price protection” 
rebates that protect the PBM and plan against large price 
increases during the benefit year. 
For drugs in the preferred tier of a plan’s formulary, enrollees 
typically have a lower copayment or coinsurance rate and 
may face fewer restrictions—such as the requirement that 
a beneficiary obtain prior authorization before purchasing 
a drug. The opposite is true for drugs in nonpreferred tiers. 
(Drugs in nonpreferred tiers generally have higher cost-sharing 
requirements or more restrictions on utilization than drugs 
in preferred tiers.) Net prices for the Medicaid program are 
heavily influenced by rebates determined by statutory rules, 
though smaller supplemental rebates may be negotiated by 
states through a similar process in exchange for placement on 
a preferred drug list.5
That process generally does not extend to drugs that must be 
administered by a physician. In such cases, the insurer often 
reimburses the administering physician who provided the drug 
rather than purchasing it from a pharmacy. Those drugs tend 
to be covered by an insurance plan’s medical benefit rather 
than its pharmacy benefit. For that reason, the pricing for 
physician-administered drugs mostly relies on the prices that 
physicians pay to purchase those drugs.
Manufacturers tend to offer larger rebates on drugs that face 
competition from other products. (In the absence of compe-
tition, a pharmaceutical company may offer only minimal or 
no rebates.) That applies to rebates for commercial insurance 
plans as well as to those provided to Medicare Part D, which 
is administered by private insurers. A large share of rebates 
provided to Medicaid, by contrast, are not directly negoti-
ated, although they partly depend on the rebates negotiated 
by commercial insurers. Specifically, Medicaid receives the 
5. The Medicaid price and spending figures in this report do not include those 
supplemental rebates because CBO does not have information about such 
rebates.
greater of the largest rebate paid to any commercial insurer 
or a statutory minimum rebate (currently 23.1 percent of the 
average manufacturer price, or AMP—the average price that 
wholesalers have paid for drugs they sell to retailers or that 
retailers paid directly to manufacturers).
Payments From Pharmacies. Pharmacies are another source 
of post-sale payments to PBMs and plans that reduce the net 
prices they have paid for prescription drugs. Such payments, 
which generally take the form of fees that pharmacies pay to 
PBMs and plans, are much smaller than those from manufac-
turers and can apply to purchases of both brand-name and 
generic drugs.6 Those fees are generally related to inclusion of 
a pharmacy in a plan’s network of preferred pharmacies or to 
discounts associated with prompt payment.7
Additional Rebates Paid to Medicaid and Other Federal 
Payers. Rebates paid to Medicaid are also subject to the 
inflation-adjustment provision described in the section of the 
report titled “Comparing Prices Among Payers.” Most states 
also negotiate with manufacturers for supplemental Medicaid 
rebates in exchange for providing beneficiaries easier access 
to the drugs associated with those rebates. Other federal 
payers negotiate discounts that make the prices paid by those 
programs substantially lower than net prices in Part D but 
somewhat higher than those paid by Medicaid.8 Although man-
ufacturers of generic drugs do not generally pay a negotiated 
rebate to insurers, Medicaid receives a statutory minimum 
rebate, currently 13 percent of the AMP plus an inflation-based 
rebate, on generic drugs.
6. The size of those fees in the Part D program has been growing in recent 
years. By one estimate, post-sale discounts accounted for 18 percent 
of all rebates and discounts collected by Part D plans in 2019. See 
Adam J. Fein, “Pharmacy DIR Fees Hit a Record $9 Billion in 2019—That’s 
18% of Total Medicare Part D Rebates” (blog entry, February 13, 2020), 
https://tinyurl.com/5xsuhua3.
7. See Deana Bell and Tracy Margiott, Medicare Part D DIR: Direct and Indirect 
Remuneration Explained (Milliman, January 2018), https://tinyurl.com/
p7r5dp9v. 
8. See Congressional Budget Office, A Comparison of Brand-Name Drug 
Prices Among Selected Federal Programs (February 2021), www.cbo.gov/
publication/56978. 
Box 1. Continued
The Flow of Payments and Products in Prescription Drug Markets

===PAGE 12===
8 PRESCRIPTION DRUGS: SPENDING, USE, AND PRICES JANUARy 2022
Medicare and Medicaid Spending on 
Prescription Drugs
Measured in 2018 dollars, spending on prescription 
drugs grew from $74 billion in 2009 to $120 billion in 
2018 in the Medicare Part D program and from $18 bil-
lion to $32 billion in Medicaid. Those programs account 
for a large share of all U.S. spending on retail prescrip-
tion drugs. T ogether, beneficiaries in those programs 
were responsible for about 45 percent of nationwide 
spending on retail prescription drugs in 2018 as mea-
sured in the National Health Expenditure Accounts. 
The analysis in this section covers a shorter period than 
the period examined for nationwide spending because 
Medicare Part D was not implemented until 2006, and 
early data were not representative of the program’s spend-
ing because it took time for enrollees to adapt to the new 
program. This was particularly true for people who were 
dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid and whose 
prescription drug coverage transitioned from Medicaid 
to Medicare Part D.16 CBO therefore decided to focus on 
the most recent 10-year period for which data were avail-
able for both programs. (Those totals reflect amounts 
spent by insurers and patients, less rebates and discounts 
for brand-name drugs.) 
For the purposes of making comparisons between 
different populations, it is most meaningful to compare 
patterns in per capita or per enrollee spending. Changes 
in spending per person reflect a variety of factors, such 
as changes in average health status—both at the pop-
ulation level and the program level—and changes in 
prices. For example, the aging of members of the baby-
boom generation most likely increased nationwide per 
capita spending over the 2009–2018 period because 
of the corresponding increase in the average age of the 
population.17 At the same time, that trend probably 
put downward pressure on per enrollee spending in 
Medicare Part D because it corresponded to a larger 
relative increase in the younger Medicare population. 
Changes in total spending are also affected by population 
and enrollment growth—and enrollment in Medicare 
Part D and Medicaid grew much faster than the nation-
wide population over the study period.18 For Medicare 
16. See Kaiser Family Foundation, The Transition of Dual Eligibles to 
Medicare Part D Prescription Drug Coverage: State Actions During 
Implementation (2006), https://tinyurl.com/2v4crsf8.
17. The baby-boom generation is the cohort born between 
1946 and 1964.
18. In Medicare Part D, enrollment grew by about 60 percent—
about the same amount as for spending—whereas the number 
Part D, net per enrollee spending on prescription drugs 
remained relatively stable, averaging about $2,700 from 
2009 to 2018. Medicaid’s per enrollee spending grew 
by about 20 percent over that period, starting from 
$445 per enrollee in 2009 and reaching $530 in 2018.19 
Over the same period, nationwide per capita spending 
grew by nearly 10 percent—from $957 to $1,073.
The greater increase in Medicaid’s per enrollee spend-
ing may partly relate to new specialty drugs that treat 
conditions, such as HIV or hepatitis C, with a higher 
prevalence in the Medicaid population than in the 
Part D population.20 Another key factor is a greater 
increase in per enrollee use of prescription drugs in 
Medicaid than in Medicare Part D, as demonstrated 
below. The role of the Medicaid expansions in those 
trends is unclear, depending on the average usage 
patterns of the newly eligible Medicaid population 
compared with the previously eligible population. One 
study found that increases in prescription volume were 
similar to increases in enrollment in states that expanded 
Medicaid, suggesting that the impact on per enrollee 
spending depends on the average prices for drugs used 
by the newly eligible population compared with the 
previously eligible population.21 
of people who received coverage for prescription drugs from the 
Medicaid program grew by about 50 percent. In comparison, the 
nationwide population grew by less than 10 percent.
19. For the purposes of this analysis, beneficiaries who are dually 
enrolled in Medicare and Medicaid are counted as Medicare 
enrollees because their prescription drug use is covered by the 
Medicare Part D benefit. In addition, some Medicaid-only 
enrollees are eligible only for limited benefits. The calculations 
of per enrollee Medicaid spending and prescription drug use 
in this report incorporate CBO’s estimate of the number of 
people with Medicaid coverage for prescription drugs. For more 
details, see Anna Anderson-Cook, Jared Maeda, and Lyle Nelson, 
Prices for and Spending on Specialty Drugs in Medicare 
Part D and Medicaid: An In-Depth Analysis, Working Paper 
2019-02 (Congressional Budget Office, March 2019), p. 32, 
www.cbo.gov/publication/55011.
20. See Kaiser Family Foundation, “Medicaid and HIV” (October 
1, 2019), https://tinyurl.com/y53tecc8; and Haley Bush and 
others, “Impact of Hepatitis C Virus and Insurance Coverage 
on Mortality,” American Journal of Managed Care, vol. 25, no. 2 
(February 2019), pp. 61–67, https://tinyurl.com/2t4t2prk.  
21. See Ausmita Ghosh, Kosali Simon, and Benjamin D. Sommers, 
“The Effect of Health Insurance on Prescription Drug Use 
Among Low-Income Adults: Evidence From Recent Medicaid 
Expansions,” Journal of Health Economics, vol. 63 (January 2019), 
pp. 64–80, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhealeco.2018.11.002.

===PAGE 13===
9
JANUARy 2022 PRESCRIPTION DRUGS: SPENDING, USE, AND PRICES
Differences in the amounts of per enrollee spending 
in Medicare Part D and Medicaid and in per capita 
spending in the United States as a whole are stark. They 
are most likely driven by a combination of differences 
in average health status and statutory rebates in the 
Medicaid program. Per enrollee spending in Medicare 
is much higher than the national average, probably 
because many Medicare beneficiaries have chronic health 
conditions and may fill several prescriptions per month. 
By contrast, lower per enrollee spending in Medicaid 
is probably attributable to a combination of the statu-
tory rebates in that program—which lead to lower net 
prices—and the fact that many Medicaid beneficiaries 
with prescription drug coverage are relatively healthy 
adults or children. That offsets higher average spending 
by the less healthy disabled population in the Medicaid 
program. 
Trends in the Use of 
Prescription Drugs
Utilization of prescription drugs nationwide has 
increased in recent years, both because the prevalence 
of chronic conditions has increased with the aging of 
the U.S. population and because new therapies and 
generic drugs have become available.22 Over the past 
several decades, consumers, health care providers, and 
insurers have witnessed the emergence of blockbuster 
therapies that treat common conditions, such as high 
blood pressure, high cholesterol, anxiety, and depres-
sion; and the emergence of generic alternatives for those 
drugs has improved access to such treatments by offering 
lower-cost options. In addition, consumers’ share of 
spending on prescription drugs has fallen substantially 
as the combined share of spending covered by federal 
programs and private health insurance has increased over 
time. 
Use of prescription drugs among those enrolled in 
Medicare Part D and Medicaid increased as well. 
Administrative data about Medicare Part D show that 
from 2009 to 2018 the average number of standardized 
prescriptions per beneficiary rose from 48 to 54 per 
year—a 13 percent increase. (Standardized prescrip-
tions are adjusted to 30-day equivalents for more than a 
30-day supply.) According to administrative data about 
Medicaid, the number of prescriptions per person with 
Medicaid coverage for prescription drugs rose from an 
average of 7 to 11 per year over that same period—an 
increase of 57 percent. (The administrative data on 
22. See, for example, IQVIA Institute for Human Data Science, 
Medicines Use and Spending in the U.S.: A Review of 2016 and 
Outlook to 2021 (May 2017), https://tinyurl.com/32ea3225.
Medicaid drug use and spending do not include infor-
mation on days supplied and thus are unadjusted.) 
As with per enrollee spending, the variation in per 
enrollee use of prescription drugs between those two 
programs reflects differences in the health status of their 
beneficiaries. 
Underlying Drivers of Increased Use
The reduction in consumers’ out-of-pocket costs for 
prescription drugs is one key factor that explains the 
increased use of prescription drugs. In 1990, consumers’ 
share of spending on prescription drugs was 57 per-
cent. By 2009, that share had fallen to 20 percent. It 
continued to fall thereafter, declining to 15 percent in 
2018. That long-term decline is largely explained by a 
gradual increase in the share of spending covered by the 
Medicare and Medicaid programs, which grew from 
13 percent in 1990 to 36 percent in 2018.23 
Some of that increase is attributable to the creation 
of Medicare Part D in 2006. In that year, the share of 
spending covered by Medicare and Medicaid increased 
to 25 percent, up from 19 percent in 2005. That share 
has steadily increased since 2006. More recent increases 
were partly attributable to the increased generosity of the 
Part D benefit that was mandated by both the ACA in 
2010 and the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018, as well as 
to the Medicaid expansions that were encouraged by the 
ACA.24 
The role of private health insurance in paying for pre-
scription drugs has also increased since 1990. Its share 
of spending was 26 percent in 1990 and 44 percent 
in 2018, although the share covered by private health 
23. Those spending figures, along with the ones in the next two 
paragraphs, are from Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, 
National Health Expenditure Data, Historical, NHE Tables, 
Table 16: “Retail Prescription Drugs Expenditures; Levels, 
Percent Change, and Percent Distribution, by Source of Funds: 
Selected Calendar Years, 1970–2018,” https://go.usa.gov/xASdV.
24. The Affordable Care Act required that cost sharing in the Part D 
coverage gap gradually fall from 100 percent of retail prices in 
2010 to 25 percent in 2020. (Also known as the donut hole, 
the coverage gap represents a range of spending for which 
beneficiaries were originally required to pay the full cost of their 
prescription drugs. Although the coverage gap was eliminated 
in 2019, the term is still defined in federal law to refer to that 
phase of the benefit.) The Bipartisan Budget Act accelerated 
that change by setting maximum cost sharing for brand-name 
drugs dispensed in the coverage gap to 25 percent in 2019. 
(That provision also applied to biosimilars, which are drugs that 
contain the same active molecule as a drug made from a living 
organism—referred to as a biologic drug.) 

===PAGE 14===
10 PRESCRIPTION DRUGS: SPENDING, USE, AND PRICES JANUARy 2022
insurance was highest in the early 2000s, ranging from 
47 percent to 50 percent. That share has since fallen.
Greater access to generic drugs in those programs may 
be another key factor that explains the increased use of 
prescription drugs: Lower-cost options make it easier 
for people to purchase their prescribed medications. 
Nationwide, the share of standardized prescriptions 
dispensed for generic drugs was 75 percent in 2009 
and reached 90 percent by 2018.25 In Medicare Part D, 
the number of standardized prescriptions dispensed for 
generic drugs more than doubled from 2009 through 
2018, whereas the number of standardized prescrip-
tions dispensed for brand-name drugs declined by a 
third. In Medicaid, the number of generic prescriptions 
roughly tripled over that time, whereas the number of 
brand-name prescriptions was essentially unchanged 
(see Figure 3). As a result, the share of prescriptions for 
generic drugs in Medicare Part D increased from 72 per-
cent in 2009 to 90 percent in 2018; that share increased 
from 70 percent to 87 percent in Medicaid over the same 
period. Increased use of generic drugs also helps explain 
why per enrollee spending in federal programs rose more 
slowly than the increase in overall use of prescription 
drugs in those programs.
Factors Contributing to Changes in the 
Use of Generic Drugs
One of the primary factors contributing to the increased 
use of generic drugs over the 2009–2018 period was the 
availability of generic equivalents for a growing number 
of brand-name drugs as their patents expired or were 
successfully challenged by manufacturers of generic 
drugs. That process accelerated in the first decade of the 
2000s when the blockbuster drugs of the previous decade 
began losing their sales-exclusivity rights. In addition, 
insurers have used a variety of tools to steer patients 
toward generic drugs. 
However, the rate of increase in the share of prescrip-
tions for generic drugs has slowed in recent years. That 
reduced growth coincides with the leveling off of two 
former sources of growth: First, the share of prescriptions 
25. See Ernst R. Berndt and Murray L. Aitken, “Brand Loyalty, 
Generic Entry, and Price Competition in Pharmaceuticals in the 
Quarter Century After the 1984 Waxman-Hatch Legislation,” 
International Journal of the Economics of Business, vol. 18, no. 2 
(August 2011), pp. 177–201, https://doi.org/10.1080/1357151
6.2011.584423; and IQVIA Institute for Human Data Science, 
Medicine Use and Spending in the U.S.: A Review of 2018 and 
Outlook to 2023 (May 2019), https://tinyurl.com/2byjnzd7.
for which a generic option is available has equaled 
92 percent since 2016. Second, since 2013, 97 percent 
of prescriptions that have both a brand-name option and 
a generic option have been dispensed as generic drugs.26 
Also, going forward, further availability of generic drugs 
may be somewhat limited if newer and more com-
plex brand-name drugs are less likely to attract generic 
competition. That could be the case if those drugs treat 
conditions that affect fewer patients and are more chal-
lenging to replicate.
Factors that Increase the Use of Generic Drugs. 
Health insurers use a variety of methods to encour-
age the use of generic drugs when they are available. 
A common tool is to charge lower out-of-pocket costs 
for generics than for brand-name alternatives. For 
example, employment-based insurance plans required 
a copayment—that is, a specified dollar amount that 
an enrollee pays at the time a drug is purchased—of 
$11, on average, in 2019 for prescription drugs in their 
first tier, which is usually largely restricted to generic 
drugs.27 Average copayments for drugs in the second and 
third tiers ranged from $33 to $59; those tiers tend to 
include preferred and nonpreferred brand-name drugs.28 
Plans often require lower cost sharing for drugs with 
“preferred” formulary placement and higher cost sharing 
for drugs with “nonpreferred” formulary placement. 
(A formulary is the plan’s list of covered prescription 
drugs.) Plans typically require even higher cost sharing 
for specialty drugs, which are less likely to have generic 
alternatives. 
Similarly, median copayments for generic drugs ranged 
from no cost for preferred generics to $3 for nonpre-
ferred generics among stand-alone Medicare Part D plans 
in 2020. (The median copayment divides copayment 
amounts into two equal groups; that is, half of enrollees 
in stand-alone Part D plans paid nothing for preferred 
generics and no more than $3 for nonpreferred generics, 
26. See IQVIA Institute for Human Data Science, Medicine Use 
and Spending in the U.S.: A Review of 2018 and Outlook to 2023 
(May 2019), https://tinyurl.com/2byjnzd7. 
27. Tiered formularies allow insurance plans to cover less expensive 
options more generously and more expensive options less 
generously. Generic drugs often require the lowest amount of cost 
sharing, whereas very expensive drugs or those for which plans 
have negotiated smaller rebates tend to have higher cost-sharing 
requirements.
28. See Kaiser Family Foundation, 2019 Employer Health Benefits 
Survey (September 25, 2019), https://tinyurl.com/wc9smxep.

===PAGE 15===
11
JANUARy 2022 PRESCRIPTION DRUGS: SPENDING, USE, AND PRICES
and the other half paid no less than those amounts.) 
Copayments for generic drugs topped out at $10 that 
year, and the median copayment for preferred brand-
name drugs was $42.29 In general, cost sharing for non-
preferred brand-name drugs and specialty drugs tended 
to be set at a percentage of retail prices—the prices 
that plans pay to pharmacies, which do not account for 
rebates provided by manufacturers.30 
Other tools are used to manage utilization directly: 
For the most part, the Medicaid program requires that 
generic versions of a drug be dispensed when available, 
and most Medicare Part D plans exclude the brand-name 
version of a drug from its formulary when a generic 
alternative is available.31 
29. Some people are enrolled in a Medicare Advantage plan for 
services provided in hospitals and by physicians and then enroll 
in a connected Part D plan provided by the same Medicare 
Advantage insurer. Those who are not enrolled in Medicare 
Advantage enroll in a stand-alone Part D plan.
30. See Juliette Cubanski and Anthony Damico, Medicare Part D: 
A First Look at Prescription Drug Plans in 2020 (Kaiser Family 
Foundation, November 2019), http://tinyurl.com/8kw9x2ts.
31. See Kaiser Family Foundation, How State Medicaid 
Programs Are Managing Prescription Drug Costs (2020), 
https://tinyurl.com/vuee3xz3; and Stacie B. Dusetzina and 
When consumers pay the full amount for a prescription 
drug out of pocket, the difference in the amount they 
pay for a generic drug versus a brand-name alternative 
is generally larger than the differences described above. 
That leads to a greater incentive to choose a generic 
substitute over a brand-name drug. Consumers may have 
to pay the full amount for a drug for three reasons: They 
lack health insurance (or their plan does not include 
coverage for prescription drugs); their prescribed drug 
is not covered by their plan; or they have not met their 
insurance plan’s annual deductible (if any) for prescrip-
tion drugs. (A deductible is the amount of spending 
an enrollee incurs before an insurer begins covering 
expenses.) In the first two cases, consumers may pay a 
pharmacy’s “usual and customary” price—which tends 
to be higher than the retail prices paid by other federal 
health care programs and commercial insurers—or 
they may pay a discounted amount using a coupon 
program such as GoodRx.32 In the third case, the 
others, “Medicare Part D Plans Rarely Cover Brand-Name Drugs 
When Generics Are Available,” Health Affairs, vol. 39, no. 8 
(August 2020), pp. 1326–1333, www.healthaffairs.org/doi/
full/10.1377/hlthaff.2019.01694.
32. See Adam J. Fein, “How GoodRx Profits From Our Broken 
Pharmacy Pricing System” (blog entry, August 31, 2020), 
https://tinyurl.com/2dh6hxyw.  
Figure 3 .
Changes in the Number of Brand-Name and Generic Prescription Drugs 
Dispensed Through Medicare Part D and Medicaid
Index (2009 = 100)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
2009 2012 2015 2018
Medicare Part D (Brand)
Medicaid (Brand)
Medicare Part D (Generic)
Medicaid (Generic) Although the use of generic 
drugs grew over the 
2009–2018 period, the use 
of brand-name drugs did 
not. Two factors account 
for that difference: Generic 
equivalents for a growing 
number of brand-name 
drugs became widely 
available, and insurers 
increasingly steered 
patients toward generic 
drugs.
Data source: Congressional Budget Office, using administrative data for Medicare Part D and Medicaid. See www.cbo.gov/publication/57050#data.

===PAGE 16===
12 PRESCRIPTION DRUGS: SPENDING, USE, AND PRICES JANUARy 2022
consumer pays the retail price that the plan negotiated 
with the pharmacy. In 2019, 13 percent of people with 
employment-based insurance were enrolled in a plan 
with a deductible specific to prescription drugs, up from 
10 percent in 2005.33
Constraints on Further Increases in the Use of 
Generic Drugs. The use of generic drugs may not 
increase much further for two reasons: First, generic 
drugs are used extensively. (Those drugs represent 
90 percent of all prescriptions.) Second, newer drugs are 
more likely to be biologics (drugs that are produced from 
living organisms). Those drugs are more complex and 
harder to manufacture or replicate than small-molecule 
drugs. Consequently, there may be fewer generics devel-
oped from them when their patents expire. 
Manufacturing a biologic with the same active 
molecule—called a biosimilar—introduces an additional 
layer of complexity compared with small-molecule drugs. 
Biosimilars are necessarily created from different cell 
lines than the originals, so they are not identical at the 
molecular level. As a result—unlike for generic versions 
of small-molecule drugs—noninnovator firms (that is, 
manufacturers of generic or biosimilar drugs) typically 
need to run clinical trials to demonstrate that their bio-
similars are not meaningfully different from the reference 
biologic product. For certain biologic drugs that have 
small markets, the difficulty that prospective imitators 
might face is compounded. The lower potential reve-
nues from sharing a small market, at lower prices, may 
increase the risk that firms producing biosimilars will fail 
to recover their higher development costs from imitating 
a complex drug.34 As a result, future competition from 
noninnovators may be less robust in some cases as the 
patents for today’s newer drugs expire. 
In addition, drug manufacturers have been able to partly 
neutralize insurance plans’ ability to steer their enroll-
ees toward generic drugs by issuing coupons directly 
to consumers. Drug coupons make expensive therapies 
more affordable and increase manufacturers’ unit sales. 
33. See Kaiser Family Foundation, 2019 Employer Health Benefits 
Survey (September 25, 2019), https://tinyurl.com/wc9smxep. 
34. This difficulty remains even though the price discounts 
associated with biosimilars are generally smaller than those 
associated with generic drugs. See IQVIA Institute for Human 
Data Science, Biosimilars in the United States 2020–2024: 
Competition, Savings, and Sustainability (September 2020), 
https://tinyurl.com/ydsjhc6y.
However, coupons interfere with insurers’ cost-control 
efforts: Specifically, by covering some or all of an enroll-
ee’s copayment or coinsurance (cost sharing in the form 
of a set percentage of the drug’s cost), coupons reduce 
or eliminate the cost difference between a more expen-
sive drug and a cheaper generic or preferred alternative. 
When a coupon induces an enrollee to choose a brand-
name drug over a generic, it increases the cost to insurers 
because they then must cover the more expensive brand-
name drug for that enrollee. (Coupons also provide 
a discount for consumers who have not yet met their 
deductible or who lack insurance coverage.) 
Coupon programs offered by manufacturers have 
become more prevalent over time: Whereas in 
2009 manufacturers issued coupons for fewer than 
100 brand-name drugs, by 2015 more than 700 drugs 
were covered by coupons.35 Some policymakers have 
taken steps to limit the use of those coupons. For exam-
ple, California has banned their use for brand-name 
drugs that have generic equivalents. By one estimate, that 
ban affects about 20 percent of the drugs covered by cou-
pons.36 Other states are considering similar legislation. In 
addition, coupons for brand-name drugs cannot be used 
by Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries because they 
constitute a violation of the anti-kickback statute.37
Trends in the Average Price of a 
Prescription 
Nationwide data on the average prices of prescription 
drugs are not readily available, but it is unlikely that the 
average net price of a prescription has increased consider-
ably in recent years. Nationwide per capita spending on 
prescription drugs has generally held steady or declined 
since the mid-2000s—other than the increase from 
2013 to 2015—whereas use of prescription drugs has 
most likely increased over that period. Further, a recent 
35. See Karen Van Nuys, Geoffrey Joyce, and Rocio Ribero, 
“Prescription Drug Coupons: A One-Size-Fits-All Policy 
Approach Doesn’t Fit the Evidence” (Health Affairs blog 
entry, February 16, 2018), www.healthaffairs.org/do/10.1377/
hblog20180215.988517/full/.
36. Ibid. 
37. Certain copayment assistance programs are available for Medicare 
Part D enrollees to use, as long as they are sponsored by a bona 
fide independent charity. See Office of Inspector General, 
Department of Health and Human Services, Supplemental 
Special Advisory Bulletin: Independent Charity Patient Assistance 
Programs, 79 Fed. Reg., no. 104 (May 30, 2014), 31120–31123, 
https://go.usa.gov/xsfqF.

===PAGE 17===
13
JANUARy 2022 PRESCRIPTION DRUGS: SPENDING, USE, AND PRICES
industry analysis shows that reductions in spending 
resulting from losses of exclusivity and generic pricing 
reductions nearly offset the growth in spending resulting 
from the entry of new drugs and price growth among 
other brand-name drugs.38 
Changes in average prices in the Medicare and Medicaid 
programs also support that assessment. In Medicare 
Part D, the average net price of a prescription (measured 
in 2018 dollars) fell from $57 in 2009 to $50 in 2018. 
The decline was greater in Medicaid; in that program, 
net prices fell from $63 in 2009 to $48 in 2018 (see 
Figure 4).39 
Changes in the average net price of a prescription are 
driven by two opposing trends: increases in the use 
of lower-cost generic drugs and increases in the prices 
of brand-name drugs. The share of prescriptions for 
generic medications that people have purchased at retail 
pharmacies has grown to 90 percent. That shift toward 
generic drugs has put considerable downward pressure 
on the average price of the prescription drugs that people 
have purchased. However, average prices of brand-name 
drugs—which constitute the remaining 10 percent of 
prescriptions—have increased considerably over time. 
Those increases in average prices represent the combined 
effect of price increases for drugs already on the market 
and prices for new drugs, which tend to be higher than 
prices for drugs already on the market. 
Comparing Prices Among Payers
Underlying the overall trends are differences in the prices 
paid by various payers. (Payers are the entities that pay 
for prescription drugs, namely commercial insurers 
and federal health care programs, as well as individuals 
38. See IQVIA Institute for Human Data Science, Medicine 
Spending and Affordability in the U.S.: Understanding Patients’ 
Costs for Medicines, Exhibit 3: “Net Manufacturer Revenues and 
Growth 2014–2019, All Channels, US$Bn” (August 2020), 
https://tinyurl.com/3y7s33rd.
39. The average net prices of a prescription for Medicare Part D 
and Medicaid that are discussed in this section are calculated 
by dividing total spending, net of rebates and discounts, by the 
total count of prescriptions. In the case of Medicare Part D, 
the denominator is standardized prescriptions, whereas it is 
the simple count of prescriptions in the case of Medicaid. In 
addition, rebates and discounts in the Medicare Part D program 
reflect only those received for brand-name drugs. Average prices 
for brand-name and generic drugs are calculated using the same 
approach, stratified by brand status; average retail prices are 
calculated using total spending at retail prices, rather than netting 
out rebates and discounts.
without prescription drug coverage.) One key factor that 
drives those differences is that manufacturers provide 
different rebate amounts to different payers for a given 
drug. Another key factor is that people with different 
sources of coverage tend to use different sets of drugs 
that have different average prices. 
Comparisons Between Medicare and Medicaid. The 
similarity in the net prices for drugs covered by Medicare 
and Medicaid masks large differences in average retail 
prices—that is, the prices paid to pharmacies—for the 
drugs that beneficiaries of those programs purchase. The 
average retail price of a prescription covered by Medicaid 
is much higher than that of a prescription covered 
by Medicare. In 2018, that average price was $98 for 
Medicaid beneficiaries—about 40 percent higher than 
the average of $69 that Medicare beneficiaries incurred 
that year. Because retail prices for a given drug tend to 
be similar in Medicare and Medicaid, those differences 
primarily reflect differences in the mix of drugs used in 
the two programs.40 
The differences in average retail prices are most likely 
attributable to differences in the two populations’ 
underlying health care needs. Medicare beneficiaries tend 
to use less complex drugs that treat chronic conditions. 
Those drugs tend to have lower retail prices. By contrast, 
the prescriptions that Medicaid-only beneficiaries fill are 
more likely to be costly drugs that treat complex condi-
tions. (Such drugs include psychotherapeutic drugs and 
HIV treatments.) Nevertheless, per enrollee spending on 
prescription drugs is lower in Medicaid than in Medicare 
because Medicaid beneficiaries tend to use fewer drugs.
In addition, Medicaid beneficiaries tend to have low 
cost-sharing requirements—and sometimes none at all—
and any cost sharing is generally not tied to the price of 
a drug. Therefore, Medicaid beneficiaries may be more 
likely to fill prescriptions for more expensive medications 
40. The comparisons in this report differ from those of a recent 
CBO report on the prices paid for brand-name drugs in federal 
programs. See Congressional Budget Office, A Comparison 
of Brand-Name Drug Prices Among Selected Federal Programs 
(February 2021), www.cbo.gov/publication/56978. This report 
documents the average prices for prescriptions filled in each 
program; the other report examined price differences for a set 
basket of prescriptions. That is, the average price differences in 
this report reflect not only price differences for given drugs, but 
also differences in the mix of drugs used by people in the two 
programs.

===PAGE 18===
14 PRESCRIPTION DRUGS: SPENDING, USE, AND PRICES JANUARy 2022
than Medicare beneficiaries, whose cost sharing is more 
directly tied to the price of a drug. 
Another CBO report indicated that Medicare beneficia-
ries tend to use less expensive drugs within a therapeutic 
class than do Medicaid beneficiaries.41 Medicare benefi-
ciaries also tend to use generic drugs to a slightly greater 
degree than Medicaid beneficiaries do. The remaining 
difference in retail prices stems from differences in aver-
age prices for the sets of brand-name and generic drugs 
used by the two populations.
Comparisons With Commercial Plans. Although CBO 
does not have data on per capita drug use or average 
prices for the rest of the U.S. population, it is plausible 
that both average use and average retail prices for that 
group are between the Medicare and Medicaid averages. 
41. See Congressional Budget Office, Competition and the Cost 
of Medicare’s Prescription Drug Program (July 2014), p. 31, 
www.cbo.gov/publication/45552.
The average age of people without public insurance 
(most of whom have commercial insurance) and the 
average health status of that population are probably 
between those of the Medicaid population (which has 
a large proportion of younger parents and children) 
and the Medicare population (which consists mostly of 
elderly people and disabled people). In addition, the fact 
that the nationwide share of prescriptions for generic 
drugs is about the same as the share of such prescrip-
tions in Medicare suggests that the generic share among 
commercially insured people is closer to Medicare’s 
percentage (90 percent) and higher than Medicaid’s 
percentage (87 percent). 
Average net prices for commercial plans most likely differ 
from net prices in Medicare and Medicaid not only 
because of differences in the set of drugs those plans’ 
enrollees take, but also because of differences in how 
those prices are determined. In CBO’s assessment, retail 
prices for a given drug are generally similar across pay-
ers. However, the net price of a given drug is generally 
Figure 4 .
Average Price of a Prescription Drug Obtained Through Medicare Part D and Medicaid
2018 Dollars
Medicare Part D (Net)
Medicaid (Net)
Medicare Part D (Retail)
Medicaid (Retail)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
2009 2012 2015 2018
Despite increases in the 
use of lower-cost generic 
drugs over the 2009–2018 
period, the average price of 
a prescription drug did not 
fall significantly, because 
of increases in the prices 
of brand-name drugs. 
Variations in prices between 
Medicare Part D and 
Medicaid reflect differences 
in the types of drugs that 
physicians prescribed for 
enrollees and differences in 
the two programs’ post-sale 
rebates and discounts.
Data source: Congressional Budget Office, using administrative data for Medicare Part D and Medicaid. See www.cbo.gov/publication/57050#data.
Net prices reflect the rebates and fees paid by manufacturers and pharmacies to payers, such as government-sponsored health insurance plans and the 
Medicaid program, for brand-name drugs. Rebates and fees paid for generic drugs are not included because CBO’s access to those data is restricted.
The data in these series reflect the average price of prescriptions filled each year and exclude drugs that are administered in physicians’ offices or hospital 
settings. 
To remove the effects of general inflation when comparing prices and spending over time, estimates of prices for prescription drugs have been adjusted to 
2018 dollars using the gross domestic product price index from the Bureau of Economic Analysis.

===PAGE 19===
15
JANUARy 2022 PRESCRIPTION DRUGS: SPENDING, USE, AND PRICES
lower for Medicaid than for commercial plans or for 
Medicare Part D because of rebates that manufacturers 
are required to pay to Medicaid plans—particularly for 
brand-name drugs. Medicaid programs are entitled by 
law to receive the greater of 23.1 percent of the drug’s 
average manufacturer price (AMP) or the largest rebate 
that the manufacturer gives to any payer (excluding 
certain government programs, such as Medicare Part D) 
for all brand-name drugs.42 The rebate also includes an 
additional component that is determined on the basis 
of growth in the drug’s AMP relative to inflation.43 For 
generic drugs, Medicaid’s rebate includes a basic rebate 
(equal to 13.0 percent of the drug’s AMP) and the same 
inflation-based component as Medicaid’s rebate for 
brand-name drugs.44
In CBO’s judgment, the average net price of a given 
brand-name drug is probably lower in Medicare Part D 
than in commercial plans. The Medicare Part D bene-
fit is administered by private insurers who also provide 
commercial insurance plans, and rebate negotiations 
by both types of plans are handled in similar fashion, 
perhaps even by the same negotiators. Those negotiations 
operate under the same general set of incentives for both 
Part D plans and private plans in that the availability of 
therapeutic alternatives—and a plan’s willingness to steer 
enrollees toward a particular drug—increases the amount 
that manufacturers are willing to provide to that plan in 
the form of a rebate (see Box 1 on page 6). 
The primary difference in bargaining leverage between 
commercial plans and Medicare Part D plans is that the 
largest rebate that a manufacturer offers to a commercial 
plan also has to be made available to Medicaid, which 
reduces the size of the largest rebate that manufacturers 
would otherwise be willing to pay. In contrast, rebates 
that manufacturers pay to Part D plans do not directly 
affect Medicaid prices. Therefore, manufacturers may 
42. The AMP is the average price paid to a manufacturer for a drug 
distributed to retail pharmacies, either through wholesalers or 
through sales directly from manufacturers to pharmacies.
43. For more details about how prices for brand-name drugs differ 
between Medicare Part D and Medicaid, see Congressional 
Budget Office, A Comparison of Brand-Name Drug Prices Among 
Selected Federal Programs (February 2021), www.cbo.gov/
publication/56978.
44. Those minimum rebate percentages were set in 2010 with the 
enactment of the Affordable Care Act. Before then, the minimum 
rebate was 15.1 percent for brand-name drugs and 11.0 percent 
for generic drugs.
be willing to pay larger rebates to Part D plans than to 
commercial insurance plans. 
However, another difference is that Part D plans must, 
by statute, cover all available drugs in each of six “pro-
tected” therapeutic classes.45 That puts Part D plans at 
a disadvantage when negotiating rebates on those drugs 
because their pharmacy benefit managers (PBMs) cannot 
credibly threaten to exclude such drugs from the Part D 
formularies they manage if the manufacturer does not 
offer a sufficient rebate.46 (PBMs are intermediaries who 
manage prescription drug benefits for insurance plans 
or other payers.) Although there may be some variation 
in the extent of price differences for a given drug across 
therapeutic classes, CBO believes that the link between 
Medicaid’s “best price” requirements and the rebates 
paid to commercial plans outweighs the impact of the 
protected classes in Part D because the best price require-
ment applies to all brand-name drugs.
Prices for Brand-Name Drugs
Net prices for brand-name drugs reflect the competitive 
landscape for a given drug. In cases in which therapeutic 
alternatives are limited, the manufacturer tends to have 
greater leverage, particularly for drugs that offer larger 
benefits to patients than other treatment options. In 
those cases, manufacturers have considerable monopoly 
power to exercise, particularly given that insured 
patients often pay a small share of the total price of a 
brand-name drug and that plans may feel considerable 
pressure to cover those drugs in order to retain market 
share. Similarly, as employers make decisions about the 
generosity of their employment-based plans, they may 
feel pressure to provide coverage for such drugs in order 
to retain employees. In situations in which there are 
therapeutic alternatives, payers and PBMs tend to have 
greater leverage to negotiate for lower net prices. In those 
cases, net prices would probably be set lower—or grow 
more slowly—because manufacturers typically accept 
lower prices in exchange for greater formulary access (or 
reduced formulary access for their competitors).
45. The protected classes are anticonvulsants, antidepressants, 
antineoplastics, antipsychotics, antiretrovirals, and 
immunosuppressants.
46. Part D plans retain other forms of negotiating leverage. For 
instance, even for those protected classes, PBMs can still use 
“steering tools,” such as utilization management or formulary-tier 
placements, to encourage beneficiaries to choose one drug over 
another. 

===PAGE 20===
16 PRESCRIPTION DRUGS: SPENDING, USE, AND PRICES JANUARy 2022
Since 2008, Medicare and Medicaid have both expe-
rienced substantial increases in the prices they pay for 
brand-name drugs. For Medicare Part D, the average net 
price of a prescription for a brand-name drug (measured 
in 2018 dollars) more than doubled between 2009 and 
2018, from $149 to $353. For Medicaid, the average 
net price increased by about 50 percent, from $147 to 
$218 (see Figure 5). Retail prices have increased even 
more dramatically. Between 2009 and 2018, the aver-
age retail price of a prescription for a brand-name drug 
in Medicare Part D more than tripled, from $175 to 
$547. For Medicaid, the average retail price more than 
doubled, from $262 to $584. (For more detail on the 
divergence between retail and net prices, see Box 2.)
Factors Underlying Rapid Increases in Prices for 
Brand-Name Drugs. Growth in average prices reflects a 
combination of several factors. For example, the com-
position of brand-name prescriptions that people fill has 
shifted from less expensive drugs toward more expensive 
drugs. One key factor in the shift toward more expensive 
drugs is that newer drugs tend to be more expensive than 
older drugs. In addition, prices for drugs already on the 
market tend to grow faster than inflation. Finally, federal 
policies influence manufacturers’ pricing strategies and 
lead to higher prices in certain circumstances.
The Role of Launch Prices. Newer drugs are often 
launched at higher prices than those paid for drugs 
currently on the market. For example, in the Medicare 
Part D program, the average net price in 2015 for 
brand-name drugs that were launched after 2010 was 
nearly four times the average net price for brand-name 
drugs already on the market in 2010. And in 2017, the 
average net price for new drugs launched after 2015 was 
12 times the average net price for brand-name drugs 
already on the market in 2015.47 As a result, the combi-
nation of take-up of new brand-name drugs and shifting 
from older brand-name drugs to generic alternatives has 
led to higher average prices for brand-name drugs. 
The phenomenon of increasingly high launch prices 
for new drugs is partly driven by the rising number of 
specialty drugs. Specialty drugs tend to be more complex 
47. Calculations in this section are based on an extension of the 
analysis in the following paper: Anna Anderson-Cook, Jared 
Maeda, and Lyle Nelson, Prices for and Spending on Specialty 
Drugs in Medicare Part D and Medicaid: An In-Depth Analysis, 
Working Paper 2019-02 (Congressional Budget Office, March 
2019), www.cbo.gov/publication/55011.
to develop and manufacture than nonspecialty drugs, 
and they generally have much higher prices because of 
the larger benefits to health and well-being that they 
tend to confer on their patients. In 2015, they accounted 
for 78 percent of spending on new drugs (launched after 
2010) in Medicare Part D and 8 percent of prescriptions 
for new drugs. In 2017, specialty drugs accounted for 
88 percent of that spending and 39 percent of pre-
scriptions for new drugs (those launched after 2015). 
Although prices for a given drug vary across payers, the 
rising influence of specialty drugs on spending—and 
therefore on usage-weighted average prices—probably 
plays a role for all payers. An industry report supports 
that idea, noting that specialty drugs represented the 
largest share of new drugs over the 2014–2018 period 
and that specialty drugs have “far higher” costs per 
patient than nonspecialty drugs.48
The Role of Price Growth. Another key component of 
the growth in average net prices for brand-name drugs 
is year-over-year price growth for a given drug, though 
the importance of that factor may differ substantially 
among payers. Using a price index approach, CBO 
found that net prices for brand-name drugs increased 
by an average of 6.3 percent per year from 2010 to 
2017 in the Medicare Part D program, after removing 
the effects of general inflation.49 In contrast, using a 
similar approach, recent research on nationwide drug 
spending patterns found that nominal net prices (that is, 
net prices with no adjustments for inflation) for brand-
name drugs grew by an average of only 3 percent per 
year over the 2012–2017 period. CBO estimates that 
nominal price growth for brand-name drugs in Medicare 
Part D was an average of 7.3 percent per year over the 
2012–2017 period, although the two calculations are 
not directly comparable because they consist of some-
what different sets of drugs. In addition, the net prices 
in the nationwide study are net of all discounts along the 
supply chain—including discounts provided to distrib-
utors or directly to patients as well as rebates that payers 
48. See IQVIA Institute for Human Data Science, Medicine Use 
and Spending in the U.S.: A Review of 2018 and Outlook to 2023 
(May 2019), p. 21, https://tinyurl.com/2byjnzd7.
49. CBO used a chained Laspeyres price index approach, which 
enabled the agency to gradually incorporate new brand-name 
specialty drugs introduced over the 2011–2016 period into the 
price index. An initially high launch price for a new drug does 
not affect that measure. Instead, it captures only the percentage 
increase in a drug’s price between two consecutive years after it is 
already on the market.

===PAGE 21===
17
JANUARy 2022 PRESCRIPTION DRUGS: SPENDING, USE, AND PRICES
received—whereas the net prices in CBO’s analysis 
account only for the rebates that payers received.50 
However, the large difference does suggest that prices 
paid by Part D over the 2012–2017 period grew more 
quickly than the prices paid by other payers, on aver-
age. That difference may have been driven by slower 
price growth in Medicaid, stemming from the statutory 
rebates that Medicaid receives. In addition, enrollees in 
commercial insurance plans may have been more likely 
to use drugs that face therapeutic competition than 
enrollees in Part D, which may have also led to slower 
growth in prices paid by commercial plans.
50. In particular, the other analysis excluded drugs that might 
be more likely to have faster price growth, such as oncology 
products, other injectables, and drugs approved with an orphan 
indication. (An orphan drug treats a rare disease or condition.) 
See Pragya Kakani, Michael Chernew, and Amitabh Chandra, 
Rebates in the Pharmaceutical Industry: Evidence From Medicines 
Sold in Retail Pharmacies in the U.S., Working Paper 26846 
(National Bureau of Economic Research, March 2020), 
www.nber.org/papers/w26846.
The Role of Federal Policies. Federal policies may have 
contributed to the growth in drug prices. Medicaid is 
entitled to the largest rebate that a manufacturer provides 
to any payer. (That requirement does not apply to the 
rebates provided to certain government programs, such 
as Medicare Part D.) That probably has increased average 
net prices for commercial payers more broadly. Similarly, 
the additional statutory rebate provided to Medicaid for 
drugs whose retail prices rise faster than inflation may 
have contributed to the higher launch prices of new 
drugs.51 However, that rebate requirement may also have 
dampened price growth over time; as a result, average 
51. See Fiona M. Scott Morton, “The Interaction Between a Most-
Favored-Customer Clause and Price Dispersion: An Empirical 
Examination of the Medicaid Rebate Rules of 1990,” Journal of 
Economics and Management Strategy (Spring 1997), vol. 6, no. 1, 
pp. 151–174, https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/
j.1430-9134.1997.00151.x; and Fiona M. Scott Morton, “The 
Strategic Response by Pharmaceutical Firms to the Medicaid 
Most-Favored-Customer Rules,” RAND Journal of Economics, 
vol. 28, no. 2 (Summer 1997), pp. 269–290, www.jstor.org/
stable/2555805.
Figure 5 .
Average Price of a Brand-Name Prescription Drug Obtained Through 
Medicare Part D and Medicaid
2018 Dollars
Medicare Part D (Net)
Medicaid (Net)
Medicare Part D (Retail)
Medicaid (Retail)
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
2009 2012 2015 2018
Growth in prices for brand-
name drugs from 2009 
to 2018 was the result of 
a combination of factors: 
higher average prices for 
drugs entering the market 
than for drugs already on 
the market and year-over-
year price growth for drugs 
after they entered the 
market.
Data source: Congressional Budget Office, using administrative data for Medicare Part D and Medicaid. See www.cbo.gov/publication/57050#data.
Net prices for brand-name drugs reflect rebates and fees paid by manufacturers and pharmacies to payers, such as government-sponsored health insurance 
plans and the Medicaid program. 
The data in these series reflect the average price of brand-name prescriptions filled each year and exclude drugs that are administered in physicians’ offices or 
hospital settings. 
To remove the effects of general inflation when comparing prices and spending over time, estimates of prices for prescription drugs have been adjusted to 
2018 dollars using the gross domestic product price index from the Bureau of Economic Analysis.

===PAGE 22===
18 PRESCRIPTION DRUGS: SPENDING, USE, AND PRICES JANUARy 2022
prices may have approached the level they would have 
without the policy. 
Likewise, Medicare’s minimum formulary require-
ments may contribute to higher net drug prices in that 
program. In addition to the requirement that Part D 
plans cover all drugs in the six protected classes, plans 
are also required to cover at least two drugs in all other 
therapeutic classes. Those requirements diminish the 
leverage that PBMs bring to their negotiations with 
manufacturers over drug prices for Part D plans. 
Manufacturers may also feel less pressure to constrain 
prices because of the increase in the share of overall drug 
spending that is covered by insurers. That reduction 
in consumers’ exposure to high prices increases their 
Box 2 .
Diverging Trends in Retail and Net Prices
The divergence between net and retail prices coincides with 
sizable increases in the rebates that “payers”—such as com-
mercial insurers and federal health care programs—receive 
from manufacturers. For Medicare Part D, the average rebate 
on a brand-name drug, as a fraction of its retail price, has more 
than doubled since 2009, increasing from 15 percent to 35 per-
cent of the program’s spending for brand-name drugs at retail 
prices in 2018. For Medicaid, the rebate percentage increased 
from 44 percent in 2009 to 63 percent in 2018. Recent 
research has found that, on a nationwide basis, average 
rebates for brand-name drugs have increased as well, from 
32 percent in 2012 to 48 percent in 2017.1 In general, consumer 
cost sharing is not directly affected by those increases in 
rebates. Instead, rebates tend to be shared among all enroll-
ees in a given plan through reductions in premiums.
Factors That Increase Rebates
Some of those increases can be traced to statutory require-
ments. In the Medicare Part D program, manufacturers have 
been required since 2011 to provide a discount known as the 
coverage gap discount. That discount constitutes a substan-
tial portion of the retail prices paid by beneficiaries on the 
manufacturers’ brand-name drugs while they are within the 
coverage gap. (Also known as the donut hole, the coverage 
gap represents a range of spending for which beneficiaries 
were required to pay the full cost of their prescription drugs. 
Although the coverage gap was eliminated by legislation 
in 2019, the term is still defined in federal law to refer to 
that phase of the benefit.) The discount was originally set at 
50 percent of the retail price and was increased to 70 percent 
in 2019. In the Medicaid program, rebates have increased both 
1. See Pragya Kakani, Michael Chernew, and Amitabh Chandra, Rebates 
in the Pharmaceutical Industry: Evidence From Medicines Sold in Retail 
Pharmacies in the U.S., Working Paper 26846 (National Bureau of Economic 
Research, March 2020), www.nber.org/papers/w26846.
as a consequence of the additional statutory rebate provided 
to Medicaid for drugs whose retail prices rise faster than 
inflation and because of the increase in the minimum rebate as 
required by the Affordable Care Act. However, the adjustment 
is limited by a cap on the total rebate Medicaid receives for a 
drug: It cannot exceed the drug’s average manufacturer price.2 
(The average manufacturer price is the average price paid to a 
manufacturer for a drug distributed to retail pharmacies, either 
through wholesalers or through sales directly from manufactur-
ers to pharmacies.)
Rebates may also have grown as a consequence of increased 
competition. The availability of substitute drug therapies gives 
insurance plans leverage they can use to negotiate larger 
rebates from manufacturers—for instance, by threatening to 
favor another manufacturer’s drug by offering it to beneficia-
ries for a smaller copayment. The Medicaid program benefits 
indirectly from that leverage because commercial insurance 
plans use it to negotiate larger rebates for themselves, and the 
Medicaid rebate on brand-name drugs is partially based on the 
largest rebate received by any of those plans. Many Medicaid 
programs also engage in negotiation with manufacturers on 
a smaller scale, bargaining over supplemental rebates they 
would receive in exchange for placing a drug on a preferred 
drug list.3 
How Rebates Affect Consumers’ Costs
Net prices are usually a better measure than retail prices of 
what consumers and insurance plans actually pay for a drug. In 
2. That cap will be removed beginning on January 1, 2024, as a result 
of the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public Law 117-2). For more 
information on the rebate cap, see Medicaid and CHIP Payment and Access 
Commission, Next Steps in Improving Medicaid Prescription Drug Policy 
(June 2019), Chapter 1, pp. 1–15, https://go.usa.gov/xsfdy.
3. The Medicaid price and spending figures in this report do not include those 
supplemental rebates because CBO does not have information on such rebates.
Continued

===PAGE 23===
19
JANUARy 2022 PRESCRIPTION DRUGS: SPENDING, USE, AND PRICES
willingness to purchase high-priced drugs. Manufacturers 
may interpret that phenomenon as a higher overall “will-
ingness to pay” and set higher prices, or increase their 
prices faster, as a result. Policymakers and stakeholders 
have pointed to the high and rising prices of prescrip-
tion drugs as a reason to question whether the profits 
of brand-name drug manufacturers are excessive. (For a 
brief overview of the profitability of the pharmaceutical 
industry, see Box 3.)
Factors That Constrain Growth in the Prices of Brand-
Name Drugs. The availability of therapeutic substitutes 
provides insurance plans and PBMs with leverage to 
negotiate lower prices. When alternatives are limited, 
particular, net prices reflect manufacturers’ net revenues and 
the effect of drug spending on insurance premiums. How-
ever, there are several exceptions. For example, consumers 
enrolled in a plan with a deductible for prescription drugs pay 
the retail price of a drug until they meet that deductible. (A 
deductible is the amount of spending an enrollee incurs before 
an insurer begins covering expenses.) In addition, in plans 
with a coinsurance requirement, enrollees pay a percentage 
of the drug’s retail price rather than making a copayment of a 
fixed dollar amount. (Coinsurance is cost sharing in the form of 
a set percentage of the drug’s cost. A copayment is a speci-
fied dollar amount that an enrollee pays at the time a drug is 
purchased.) Furthermore, average cost sharing for Medicare 
Part D beneficiaries is required to be based on retail prices—
which means that beneficiaries pay for a larger share of net 
drug spending as rebate percentages grow. 
Consumers do not get the rebates directly. But with com-
petitive forces in insurance markets and regulatory medical 
loss ratio (MLR) requirements, consumers probably receive 
a substantial fraction of those rebates—in the form of lower 
premiums or more generous benefits. The MLR provisions 
require insurers to devote at least 80 percent of their enroll-
ees’ premium payments—85 percent for large group plans—to 
paying claims or making quality improvements. Failing that, 
they must provide a rebate equal to the difference between 
that requirement and what the plan actually paid in claims to 
their enrollees.4 As a result, rebates benefit all enrollees in a 
plan, regardless of the number or type of prescription drugs 
they purchase. 
Some enrollees make higher out-of-pocket payments that are 
based on the prices their plans pay to pharmacies, rather than 
4. See Rachel Fehr and Cynthia Cox, “Data Note: 2019 Medical Loss 
Ratio Rebates” (Kaiser Family Foundation, September 26, 2019), 
https://tinyurl.com/2wu295ke.
on net prices that account for manufacturers’ rebates. That 
is particularly true of enrollees in Part D plans because their 
benefit designs are required to be actuarially equivalent to a 
plan with the standard benefit design. (The standard benefit 
calls for a coinsurance rate of 25 percent once the deductible 
is met—until the catastrophic threshold is reached.) In addition, 
cost sharing in the coverage gap tends to take the form of 
coinsurance rather than a flat copayment. When competition 
from other drugs leads to larger rebates and lower net prices, 
that 25 percent coinsurance constitutes a larger share of the 
net price than for drugs with net prices that are closer to retail 
prices—that is, for drugs with less competition (or generic 
drugs). As a result, enrollees who are more likely to use 
brand-name drugs that face competition from other drugs pay 
a greater share of net drug costs than enrollees who primarily 
use generic drugs or brand-name drugs without therapeutic 
competition. 
That dynamic was one of the factors that led CBO to esti-
mate in 2019 that premiums for the Medicare Part D benefit 
would increase under the Proposed Rule on Safe Harbors 
for Pharmaceutical Rebates.5 CBO anticipated that the rule 
would result in pharmacies’ charging beneficiaries prices for 
prescription drugs that reflect the discounts that pharmacy 
benefit managers negotiate with manufacturers. Enrollees 
who use brand-name drugs that face greater competition and 
have larger rebates would benefit from the lower cost sharing 
that results from rebates being applied when the prescription 
is purchased. However, directing part of those rebates toward 
reducing cost-sharing payments would reduce the amount of 
rebate dollars that could be used toward reducing premiums 
for all enrollees, leading to higher premiums.
5. See Congressional Budget Office, “Incorporating the Effects of the 
Proposed Rule on Safe Harbors for Pharmaceutical Rebates in CBO’s Budget 
Projections” (supplemental material for Updated Budget Projections: 
2019 to 2029, May 2019), www.cbo.gov/system/files/2019-05/55151-
SupplementalMaterial.pdf (286 KB).
Box 2. Continued
Diverging Trends in Retail and Net Prices

===PAGE 24===
20 PRESCRIPTION DRUGS: SPENDING, USE, AND PRICES JANUARy 2022
such as when a new drug is the first to treat a particular 
condition, then insurance plans and PBMs have limited 
leverage to negotiate lower prices. As competing products 
enter the market, payers gain the flexibility to exclude a 
given drug or to limit patients’ use of that drug through 
higher cost sharing or other utilization management 
tools. 
Consolidation within the pharmacy-benefit-management 
industry has also increased the leverage that PBMs wield 
in negotiating on behalf of their client insurers. In the 
1980s, the industry consisted of many small PBMs, 
which, for the most part, simply processed pharmacy 
claims. Since then, the industry has evolved and now 
develops and administers many insurance plans’ drug 
Box 3 .
The Profitability of Manufacturers of Brand-Name Drugs
Policymakers and stakeholders often express concern that the 
profits of manufacturers of brand-name drugs are excessive—
particularly given the high and rising prices of many brand-
name drugs and the budgetary pressures posed by rising 
health care costs. That concern may stem from the observation 
that brand-name prescription drugs are often priced at levels 
that greatly exceed the immediate costs of manufacturing and 
distributing them.1 
However, the profitability of pharmaceutical manufactur-
ers depends on long-term comparisons of revenues versus 
spending—that is, spending for research and development 
(R&D) and for production of the firm’s entire portfolio of poten-
tial products. In general, studies that make those longer-range 
comparisons find that the profitability of the pharmaceuti-
cal industry is similar to that of other industries, whereas 
shorter-range comparisons find that the profitability of the 
pharmaceutical industry exceeds that of other industries.
Factors Underlying the Profitability of 
Pharmaceutical Manufacturers
Understanding the profitability of the pharmaceutical industry 
requires distinguishing the revenues and short-run costs of 
producing a drug once it is approved from the much larger 
long-run costs of drug development and gaining approval for 
sale. Small-molecule brand-name drugs tend to have incre-
mental production costs of just pennies per pill. Production 
costs are often higher for biological drugs, which might require 
more complex and costlier manufacturing processes. But those 
costs still tend to be low when compared with the prices that 
such brand-name prescription drugs often command. Mean-
while, the process of developing and testing a new drug and 
bringing it to market is risky, costly, and time-consuming.
Brand-name drugs generally command high prices once 
they are approved, because of the market power that 
1. Generic drug prices are usually close to their unit cost of production, 
particularly when many generic versions of a drug are available. 
manufacturers of brand-name drugs often have.2 To encour-
age R&D, manufacturers of a brand-name drug are granted 
exclusive rights to produce and market that drug through a 
combination of patents (granted by the U.S. Patent and Trade-
mark Office) and exclusivity periods (set by statute, depending 
on the type of drug and the population it treats). Depending 
on factors such as the timing of a manufacturer’s patent 
application and how long a drug spends in clinical trials, those 
rights might be in force for a decade or more following the 
drug’s approval by the Food and Drug Administration. During 
that time, the manufacturer is the sole producer of that drug, 
although it may face competitive pressure if there are other, 
similar drugs available in the same therapeutic class. When the 
market-exclusivity period expires, other firms typically intro-
duce generic versions of that drug, and those generic drugs 
are often sold at much lower prices than the brand-name drug. 
The period of exclusive sales rights can be highly profitable for 
the manufacturer, particularly when a drug confers substantial 
clinical benefits and few or no therapeutic alternatives are 
available. 
However, from the firm’s perspective, profitability reflects its 
expenditures for all of the drugs in its portfolio of R&D activity, 
as well as its revenue streams and production costs for drugs 
that have reached the market. Decisions about whether to 
undertake the necessary laboratory research and clinical trials 
for any particular compound must be made in the face of 
uncertainty about its ultimate clinical value. Most drug com-
pounds yield no significant therapeutic results; of those that 
enter clinical trials, only about 12 percent make it to market.3 
2. Another factor underlying brand-name drug prices is that insured patients are 
insulated from the full cost of their prescription drug choices, with the result 
that consumers are less sensitive to prices than they otherwise would be. 
3. See Joseph A. DiMasi, Henry G. Grabowski, and Ronald W. Hansen, 
“Innovation in the Pharmaceutical Industry: New Estimates of R&D 
Costs,” Journal of Health Economics, vol. 47 (May 2016), p. 25, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhealeco.2016.01.012.
Continued

===PAGE 25===
21
JANUARy 2022 PRESCRIPTION DRUGS: SPENDING, USE, AND PRICES
formularies. In addition, the PBM industry has come to 
be dominated by just a few large firms. A 2015 merger 
between the third- and fourth-largest firms left the three 
largest PBMs handling more than 70 percent of the 
industry’s prescription drug claims. That market power 
helps those large PBMs negotiate bigger rebates and 
steeper discounts because they represent a larger share 
of the patient population. However, their market power 
remains limited when negotiating net prices of drugs 
without direct substitutes. 
Nevertheless, greater consolidation within the PBM 
industry also has implications for plans’ costs. For exam-
ple, PBMs probably use their increased leverage when 
negotiating with insurance plans over contract terms to 
charge higher fees to plans (which could take the form of 
PBMs keeping a larger fraction of rebates). The insurance 
plans then pass some share of those higher costs on to 
consumers in the form of higher premiums. In addition, 
over time, there has been an increase in consolidation 
between PBMs and insurers, as well as between PBMs 
So, for a firm with 100 products in development and 12 that 
make it to market, profitability depends on the revenues from 
the 12 marketed products and the cost of all 100 products in 
development. Even in those few cases in which a manufacturer 
successfully develops a new product, it sees no revenue for 
years following the various decisions about whether to pro-
ceed with the requisite stages of development. 
Investment capital that is committed to drug R&D could have 
been invested instead in other activities that are less risky yet 
still profitable. Because of the relatively high risk of failure in 
drug development, investors in R&D for those drugs tend to 
require, in compensation, a high return on their investment 
if drug development is successful. The investment decisions 
of manufacturers of brand-name drugs are informed by that 
same mechanism. A recent report by the Congressional Budget 
Office found that both total spending on R&D by manufac-
turers of brand-name drugs and the fraction of their reve-
nues devoted to spending on R&D have increased in recent 
years.4 Accordingly, the opportunity costs of that investment 
capital—the returns that could have been earned through other 
investments—are an important component of a manufacturer’s 
total costs and must be taken into account when measuring the 
company’s profitability over the long term. 
Estimates of Pharmaceutical Firms’ Profits
Estimating the long-term profits that manufacturers of brand-
name drugs realize requires examining the entire life cycle 
of development of a portfolio of drugs and the sales of those 
drugs. In CBO’s assessment, those costs (including long-term 
capital costs) and revenues constitute the most comprehensive 
measures of profitability. Estimates of such measures present 
challenges, and the results can be sensitive to the methods 
4. See Congressional Budget Office, Research and Development in the 
Pharmaceutical Industry (April 2021), www.cbo.gov/publication/57025.
used. Some analyses that have made such an adjustment have 
found that, compared with other industries, the pharmaceutical 
industry does not have unusually high profits. A pair of recent 
studies found that when capital costs and financial risks are 
taken into account, the pharmaceutical industry’s profits are 
close to—or just below—the middle of the distribution of all 
industries and might be trending downward.5 
Some estimates of the pharmaceutical industry’s profitability 
reflect profits earned during a specific period, such as a year 
or a quarter. Such estimates often indicate that profit margins 
are higher for manufacturers of brand-name drugs than they 
are for many other firms.6 An annual profit estimate provides a 
glimpse of a drug manufacturer’s performance during a given 
year, but because it does not reflect the long-term opportunity 
costs and risks associated with R&D investment choices, it 
does not provide a complete assessment of the profitability of 
that firm’s drug development activity. A full discussion of the 
profitability of the pharmaceutical industry is beyond the scope 
of this report.
5. See Congressional Budget Office, Research and Development in the 
Pharmaceutical Industry (October 2006), www.cbo.gov/publication/18176; 
Office of Technology Assessment, Pharmaceutical R&D: Costs, Risks, and 
Rewards, OTA-H-522 (February 1993); Richard Manning and Saurav Karki, 
Economic Profitability of the Biopharmaceutical Industry, Bates White Policy 
Brief (September 2018); www.bateswhite.com/newsroom-insight-219.html; 
and Richard Manning and Saurav Karki, Economic Profitability of the 
Biopharmaceutical Industry: 2020 Update, Bates White Policy Brief 
(May 2020), https://tinyurl.com/h736mvj8. 
6. See Fred D. Ledley and others, “Profitability of Large Pharmaceutical 
Companies Compared With Other Large Public Companies,” JAMA, vol. 323, 
no. 9 (March 2020), pp. 834–843, https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2020.0442; 
and Government Accountability Office, Drug Industry: Profits, Research 
and Development Spending, and Merger and Acquisition Deals, GAO-18-40 
(November 17, 2017), www.gao.gov/products/GAO-18-40.
Box 3. Continued
The Profitability of Manufacturers of Brand-Name Drugs

===PAGE 26===
22 PRESCRIPTION DRUGS: SPENDING, USE, AND PRICES JANUARy 2022
and pharmacies, including mail-order and specialty phar-
macies. Although that type of consolidation can increase 
efficiency and reduce plans’ costs, the extent to which 
reduced costs are passed on to enrollees depends on the 
amount of competition in the market. In addition, to 
the extent that insurers, PBMs, and pharmacies negotiate 
with entities outside their ownership group, there may 
be an incentive to charge higher fees to rival companies.52
Prices for Generic Drugs
As with brand-name drugs, the competitive landscape 
for generic drugs has a great deal of influence over prices 
for those drugs. Unlike brand-name drugs, however, 
generic drugs often face direct competition because the 
same drug is often manufactured by several companies. 
Although new generic drugs may have higher prices 
when they first enter the market, those prices tend to fall 
as competitors enter the market. 
As a result, in contrast with the growth observed in 
the average prices of brand-name drugs, average prices 
of generic drugs have tended to fall in real terms in 
recent years. In Medicare Part D, the average price of 
a generic prescription was $22 in 2009 and gradually 
fell to $17 in 2018.53 For Medicaid, the average price of 
a generic prescription fell from $27 in 2009 to $23 in 
2018 (see Figure 6). A 2016 federal review found that, 
from mid-2013 to mid-2014, nearly 65 percent of 
prescriptions for generic drugs in the Medicaid program 
were for drugs whose prices had declined over that time, 
52. See Rachel Schmidt, Principal Analyst, Medicare Payment 
Advisory Commission, “Vertical Integration and Medicare 
Payment Policy” (presentation at a public meeting, October 2, 
2020), https://go.usa.gov/xtxAK (PDF , 293 KB); and Medicare 
Payment Advisory Commission, transcript of a public meeting 
(October 1, 2020), pp. 83–86, https://go.usa.gov/xtxAR 
(PDF , 927 KB). 
53. The magnitude of this reduction is much smaller than what the 
Medicare Payment Advisory Commission (MedPAC) found 
in a recent study. However, the MedPAC analysis used a price 
index approach that does not reflect the introduction of new 
products or changes in the mix of products. The figures reported 
in this publication are simple averages of the price of generic 
drugs that Part D enrollees purchased. Because the first generic 
for a particular drug tends to enter at a higher price, which also 
leads to a natural shift toward more expensive generic drugs 
upon entry, the difference in results is unlikely to represent an 
inconsistency between the two analyses. See Medicare Payment 
Advisory Commission, July 2021 Data Book: Health Care 
Spending and the Medicare Program (July 2021), Section 10, 
Chart 10-25, https://go.usa.gov/xta3x.
even before accounting for rebates to the Medicaid 
program. That review, by the Department of Health 
and Human Services (HHS), also cited a finding from 
Express Scripts, a PBM: Specifically, Express Scripts 
indicated that for the top 80 percent of generic drugs (by 
unit sales), the average prescription price fell in 2014 by 
20 percent. HHS concluded that generic prices are not 
a key driver of high spending on prescription drugs.54 
Other recent evidence suggests that year-over-year prices 
for generic drugs have fallen in the past several years, on 
average.55
Even so, price increases for some generic drugs have 
raised concerns for policymakers. For example, there 
are ongoing criminal and civil proceedings related to 
anticompetitive behavior that led to higher prices.56 In 
addition, HHS has found that for about one-fourth of 
generic drugs with the highest spending in the Medicaid 
program, prices in recent years have increased faster than 
the rate of inflation (before accounting for Medicaid’s 
rebates). However, HHS also found that the set of drugs 
with particularly large price increases represents a very 
small share of the market and that those price increases 
did not have a sizable impact on overall spending.57 
More generally, increases in the prices of specific generic 
drugs—whether facilitated by anticompetitive behavior 
or by the exercise of market power, or simply reflecting 
54. See Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation, 
Department of Health and Human Services, Understanding 
Recent Trends in Generic Drug Prices, ASPE Issue Brief (January 
2016), https://go.usa.gov/xsfPp.
55. See Richard G. Frank, Andrew Hicks, and Ernst R. Berndt, 
The Price to Consumers of Generic Pharmaceuticals: Beyond the 
Headlines, Working Paper 26120 (National Bureau of Economic 
Research, July 2019), www.nber.org/papers/w26120.
56. See Department of Justice, “Sixth Pharmaceutical Company 
Charged in Ongoing Criminal Antitrust Investigation: Fifth 
Company to Admit It Fixed Prices of Generic Drugs” (press 
release, July 23, 2020), https://go.usa.gov/xsfEx; and Office of the 
Attorney General of Connecticut, “Drug Price-Fixing Complaint 
Unsealed: Unredacted Emails Provide Evidence of Conspiracy to 
Inflate Prices and Hinder Competition, Obstruct Justice” (press 
release, June 24, 2019), https://tinyurl.com/5r2sks7p.
57. See Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation, 
Department of Health and Human Services, Understanding 
Recent Trends in Generic Drug Prices, ASPE Issue Brief 
(January 2016), https://go.usa.gov/xsfPp. (The price here is the 
average manufacturer price, or AMP , which is the average price 
paid by wholesalers for drugs distributed to the retail class of 
trade, net of customary prompt-pay discounts.)  

===PAGE 27===
23
JANUARy 2022 PRESCRIPTION DRUGS: SPENDING, USE, AND PRICES
shifts in supply or demand—affect total drug spend-
ing only to the extent that those drugs are sold in large 
quantities. Nevertheless, those price increases could have 
a substantial impact on consumers who use drugs that 
have increased in price, especially if those consumers’ 
out-of-pocket costs are based on the price of the drug.
Figure 6 .
Average Price of a Generic Prescription Drug Obtained Through 
Medicare Part D and Medicaid
2018 Dollars
Medicare Part D (Retail)
Medicaid (Retail)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
2009 2012 2015 2018
Whereas the average 
prices of brand-name drugs 
tend to rise over time, the 
opposite is true for generic 
drugs. Average prices for 
generic drugs tend to fall 
over time as competitors 
enter the market, which 
has led to a decline in the 
average prices of generic 
drugs in recent years.
Data source: Congressional Budget Office, using administrative data for Medicare Part D and Medicaid. See www.cbo.gov/publication/57050#data.
The data in these series reflect the average price of generic prescriptions filled each year and exclude drugs that are administered in physicians’ offices or 
hospital settings. 
To remove the effects of general inflation when comparing prices and spending over time, estimates of prices for prescription drugs have been adjusted to 
2018 dollars using the gross domestic product price index from the Bureau of Economic Analysis.

===PAGE 28===
List of Figures
Figures
1. Spending on Prescription Drugs Purchased From Pharmacies as a  
Share of Total Spending on Health Care Services and Supplies 4
2. Total Nationwide Spending, per Capita, on Prescription Drugs Purchased From Pharmacies 5
3. Changes in the Number of Brand-Name and Generic Prescription Drugs 
Dispensed Through Medicare Part D and Medicaid 11
4. Average Price of a Prescription Drug Obtained Through Medicare Part D and Medicaid 14
5. Average Price of a Brand-Name Prescription Drug Obtained Through Medicare Part D and Medicaid 17
6. Average Price of a Generic Prescription Drug Obtained Through Medicare Part D and Medicaid 23

===PAGE 29===
About This Document
This report was prepared at the request of the Chairman of the Senate Committee on Finance. In 
keeping with the Congressional Budget Office’s mandate to provide objective, impartial analysis, the 
report makes no recommendations.
Tamara Hayford and David Austin prepared the report with guidance from Joseph Kile, Lyle Nelson 
(formerly of CBO), and Julie T opoleski. Ru Ding contributed to the analysis. Anna Anderson-Cook 
(formerly of CBO), Colin Baker, Elizabeth Bass, Julia Christensen, Ryan Greenfield, Stuart Hammond, 
Lara Robillard, Asha Saavoss, Ellen Werble, Chapin White, and Kate Young provided useful 
comments. Joshua Varcie fact-checked the report.
Amitabh Chandra of the Kennedy School of Government and Harvard Business School, Sean Keehan 
of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services’ Office of the Actuary, Chris Park of the Medicaid 
and CHIP Payment and Access Commission, and Rachel Schmidt and Shinobu Suzuki of the 
Medicare Payment Advisory Commission commented on an earlier draft. The assistance of external 
reviewers implies no responsibility for the final product; that responsibility rests solely with CBO.
Mark Doms, Jeffrey Kling, and Robert Sunshine reviewed the report. Loretta Lettner edited it, and 
Jorge Salazar created the graphics and prepared the text for publication. The report is available at 
www.cbo.gov/publication/57050.
CBO seeks feedback to make its work as useful as possible. Please send comments to 
communications@cbo.gov.
Phillip L. Swagel
Director
January 2022
CBO has corrected this page since the report was originally published. Corrections are listed at the end of the report.
===PAGE 30===
Corrections
The Congressional Budget Office has corrected this report since its original publication. Both the 
PDF and online versions were corrected, but for ease of reference, this notice indicates the location of 
the correction in the PDF .
The following change was made on January 21, 2022:
Page 25, third paragraph: The list of external reviewers was amended to add a missing name.