
===PAGE 1===
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
REPORT TO CONGRESS 
Prescription Drug Spending, 
Pricing Trends, and Premiums 
in Private Health Insurance Plans 
Report Required by the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services  
Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation  
November  2024  
Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation 
===PAGE 2===
    
      
     
     
   
 
      
       
 
 
      
       
   
     
    
  
 
 
        
     
   
 
    
    
        
 
 
 
  
The Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation (ASPE) advises the Secretary of the U.S. Department 
of Health and Human Services (“HHS” or “the Department”) on policy development in health, disability, 
human services, data, and science; and provides advice and anal ysis on economic policy. ASPE leads 
special initiatives; coordinates the Department's evaluation, research, and demonstration activities; and 
manages cross-Department planning activities such as strategic planning, legislative planning, and review 
of regul ations. Integral to this role, ASPE conducts research and evaluation studies; develops policy 
analyses; and estimates the cost and benefits of policy alternatives under consideration by the 
Department or Congress. 
Office of Health Policy 
The Office of Heal th Policy (HP) provides a cross -cutting policy perspective that bridges Departmental 
programs, public and private sector activities, and the research community, in order to develop, analyze, 
coordinate, and provide leadership on health policy issues for the Secretary. HP carries out this mission 
by conducting policy, economic and budget analyses, assisting in the development and review of 
regulations, assisting in the development and formulation of budgets and legislation, and assisting in 
survey design efforts, as well as conducting and coordinating research, evaluation, and information 
dissemination on issues relating to health policy. 
Suggested Citation 
Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation, U.S. Department of Health & Human 
Services. Prescription Drug Spending, Pricing Trends, and Premiums in Private Health Insurance Plans . 
November 2024. https://aspe.hhs.gov/ 
Acknowledgements 
Many people at ASPE contributed to this project. The lead authors are Anne Hall and Kenneth Finegold. 
Other contributors include Thomas Buchmueller, Nancy De Lew, Steve Sheingold, and Rachael Zuckerman. 
ASPE also acknowledges support from RAND staff. The statements expressed in this r eport do not 
necessarily reflect the views of RAND. 
November 2024 REPORT TO CONGRESS 2 
===PAGE 3===
    
 
     
   
   
   
     
   
    
   
  
  
  
  
 
  
    
  
  
  
   
  
  
 
  
Table of Contents 
Executive Summary: Key Findings on Prescription Drug Spending, Pricing Trends, and Contributions to 
Premium Changes 4 .....
........................................................................................................... 
Improv
ing RxDC 7 .....
...................................................................................................... 
Overvi
ew of Report 7 .....
................................................................................................. 
I. Backg
round: Prescription Drug Coverage, Benefit Design, and the Pricing of Retail Prescription 
Drugs 9 .....
............................................................................................................................ 
Trends i
n Prescription Drug Coverage and Benefits 9 .....
...................................................... 
Trends i
n Prescription Drug Benefit Design 10 .....
................................................................
Underst
anding Prescription Drug Pricing and the Market for Prescription Drugs 12 .....
.............
Recent 
Increases in Drug Spending Mostly Driven by Increases in Drug Prices 13 .....
.................
Rising
 Prescription Drug Prices Affect Adherence and Health Through Higher Cost-Sharing 14 ....
II. The Need f
or RxDC 15 .....
....................................................................................................
RxDC
 Can Help Answer Basic Questions 15 .....
.....................................................................
Introduc
tion to RxDC 15 .....
..............................................................................................
III. Brief
 Description of the 2020 and 2021 RxDC and Initial Findings 16 .....
.....................................
Brief
 Description of RxDC 16 .....
........................................................................................
Limitat
ions of the Initial Two Years of RxDC 17 .....
...............................................................
Illus
trative Analyses of 2020 and 2021 RxDC Data 18 .....
.......................................................
IV.  Conc
lusion 22 .....
...............................................................................................................
Appendix
 A. Ratio of Net to Gross Spending by Geography in the 2020 and 2021 RxDC Data 24 .....
.....
Endnotes 26 .....
......................................................................................................................
Novem
ber 2024 REPORT TO CONGRESS 3 
===PAGE 4===
    
    
 
     
        
        
         
    
      
     
         
   
           
         
        
    
 
   
       
       
   
       
     
          
           
       
     
    
      
 
  
 
    
   
       
    
    
      
  
  
  
  
   
Executive Summary: Key Findings on Prescription Drug Spending, Pricing Trends, 
and Contributions to Premium Changes 
Prescription drug prices are a top concern for policymakers and the public. As detailed in a recent report 
by ASPE, more than 4,200 drug products had manufacturer list price increases from January 2022 to 
January 2023; the average change in the manufacturer list price of these drugs was 15.2 percent, and 46.0 
percent of these drugs had price increases that were higher than the rate of general inflation. 1 For ma ny 
drugs, however, list prices are not the prices ultimately paid to manufacturers; payers or pharmacy benefit 
managers (PBMs) negotiate with manufacturers over formulary placement in exchange for discounts in 
the form of rebates a off the list price. 
a As used throughout this report, the term “rebates” includes rebates, fees, and other remuneration transferred t o 
PBMs from drug manufacturers and pharmacies. 
Furthermore, these post-rebate or net prices paid by private health insurance plans and issuers may be 
higher than the net prices received by manufacturers given supply chain markups and amounts retained 
by or paid to PBMs. However, comprehensive data on the net prices paid by private health insurance 
plans, issuers, and consumers do not exist for private health insurance coverage. To address that gap in 
data availability, section 204 of Division BB of Title II of the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 (CAA) 
(“Section 204”) directed group health plans and health insurance issuers offering group or individual (non-
group) health insurance coverage (“private health insurance plans and issuers”) to submit annually certain 
data on premiums, enrollment, nondrug medical spending, spending on prescription drugs, and 
prescription drug rebates to HHS, the Department of Labor (DOL) and the Department of the Treasury 
(UST) (collectively “the Departments”) . b,2 The Office of Personnel Management (OPM) has joined the 
Departments to promote transparency in prescription drug and health care spending in the Federal 
Employees Health Benefits (FEHB) Program by requiring FEHB carriers to report information to the 
Departments, consistent with Section 204 and implementing regulations issued by the Departments and 
OPM. This new data collection is referred to in this report as the Prescription Drug Data Collection or 
“RxDC.” On November 23, 2021, regulations directing private health insurance plans and issuers on how 
to report the data to the Departments appeared in the Federal Register . 
c Data for the first two years 
(2020 and 2021) were submitted by January 31, 2023. d 
b In this report, the term “private health insurance plans and issuers” will be used to refer to all group health pla ns 
and coverage (both self-insured and fully insured) issued by private health insurance issuers and/orsponsored by 
employers (includingFederal,state and local governments) and all individual(non-group)health insurancecoverage 
issued by private health insurance issuers . The term “private health insurance coverage” will be used to refer 
collectively to the coverage offered by these plansand issuers. These terms do not include plans operated by priva t e 
companies for beneficiaries of public insurance programs such as Medicare or Medicaid. The participants, 
beneficiaries, and/or enrollees covered by private health insurance coverage will collectively be referred to as 
“members.” 
c The regulations relating to RxDC may be found at https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2021/11/23/2021-
2
5183/prescription -drug-and-health-care-spending. 
d Data for 2022 were submitted by June 1, 2023 and will be analyzed in the next biannual report to Congress . 
Section 204 further directs the Secretary of HHS, throug h ASPE and in coordination with the Inspector 
General of HHS, to make available on the HHS website a report on “prescription drug reimbursements 
November 2024 REPORT TO CONGRESS 4 
===PAGE 5===
    
    
      
      
    
      
        
    
     
      
  
    
        
    
       
  
       
   
    
        
       
       
 
 
  
      
   
     
    
   
   
 
    
  
 
       
    
   
     
     
       
    
under group health plans and group and individual health insurance coverage, prescription drug pricing 
trends, and the role of prescription drug costs in contributing to premium increases or decreases under 
such plans or coverage,” with similar direction to DOL and UST. The Departments agreed to address this 
directive by submitting and posting to their internet websites one report covering all private health 
insurance plans and issuers subject to Section 204 reporting requirements as well as FEHB plans. ASPE, 
acting on behalf of the Departments and OPM, contracted with RAND to conduct a literature review, 
analyze the RxDC data, and present the results, which may be found in the report from RAND Health Care, 
“Prescription Drug Prices, Rebates, and Insurance Premiums” (“RAND Background Report”) posted 
alongside this report. We summarize key findings from RAND’s analysis and other published data, on each 
of these topics below. 
Prescription Drug Spending (or Reimbursements) and Coverage 
• The US spent a total of $406 billion on retail prescription drugs net of rebates in 2022, according to 
the N
ational Health Expenditure Accounts (NHEA), rising from $291 billion in 2014. e Per capita retail 
prescription drug spending rose an average of 3.8 percent per year over the same period, from $974 
in 2014 to $1,227 in 2022.
f 
e For the purposes of this report, retail prescription drugs are defined as prescription drugs dispensed through ret a il 
brick-and-mortar pharmacies and drug stores and mail-order pharmacies. For patients with insurance, retail drugs 
are generally paid for through pharmaceutical benefits. Retail drugs do not include prescription drugs administ ered 
in physicians’ offices and hospitals and which are generally paid for through insurance plans’ medical benefits. 
f The NHEA may be found at https://www.cms.gov/data-research/statistics-trends-and-reports/national-h ealth-
expe
nditure-data/historical. Total and per capita retail prescription drug spending are presented in Table 2 of the 
NHE
A. These figures are not adjusted for inflation; inflation, as measured by the CPI-U, averaged 2.7% annually 
during this period. 
• An estimated 143 million Americans had prescription drug coverage from private group hea lt h 
insur
ance plans (mostly employer -sponsored), and an estimated 11 million had prescription drug 
coverage from individual market health insurance plans in 2020. g 
g These numbers were calculated from theHousehold Component of theMedical Expenditure Panel Survey(MEPS-
HC) and only include those individuals living in the community. The sampling frame for the MEPS-HC is based on t ha t 
of the National Health Interview Survey which excludes people with no fixed address or residing permanently in a n 
institution such as a nursing home. 
• Most private health insurance coverage includes prescription drug benefits. Most i ndividual (non-
gro
up) market and small group market plans are statutorily required to provide prescription drug 
coverage. Nearly all large group market plans provide prescription drug coverage though they are not 
required to. h 
h The requirement for certain health insurance coverage toprovide Essential Health Benefits (EHB) was introduced 
by the Affordable Care Act(ACA). See section 1301(a)(1)(B) of the ACA and section 2707 of the Public Health Service 
(PHS) Act. Large group market plans and self-insuredgroup health plans are not required to cover EHB.Certain hea lt h 
plans already in force at the time the ACA was enacted that also meet certain other requirements (“grandfathered” 
plans), and certain individua l and small group market plans in force at the time many of the ACA’s market ref orm s 
took effect for the 2014 plan year(“grandmothered” plans)are notrequired tocoverEHB. Plans that are not subject 
to the requirement may nonetheless offer partial or comprehensive drug coverage. 
November 2024 REPORT TO CONGRESS 5 
===PAGE 6===
    
    
          
        
     
   
  
       
 
  
        
         
       
   
           
     
        
     
     
  
 
   
  
 
  
    
      
     
         
     
    
   
           
      
    
   
      
     
 
    
  
• Average deductibles and out-of-pocket maximums in employer-sponsored coverage have generally 
inc
reased since 2014. i Employer-sponsored health insurance plans are making greater use of 
coinsurance, in which members pay a percentage of a drug’s cost, rather than fixed copayment s. 
Employer-sponsored health insurance plans have also adopted benefit designs with a larger number 
of cost-sharing tiers, allowing them to set higher cost-sharing for more expensive brand drugs. 
i The trends in this bullet come from RAND’s analysis of theKFF Employer Health Benefits Surveyin the years 2014-
22. The sample includes private firms and nonfederal government employers with three or more employees. The 
survey does not include multiemployer plans. 
Prescription Drug Pricing Trends 
• Despite differences in methods, data sources, the prescription drugs analyzed, and the period 
cov
ered, estimates of recent trends consistently suggest gross drug prices have been growing more 
rapidly than prices net of rebates paid by manufacturers to PBMs. j, 3 
j The IQVIA Institute for Human Data Sciences, for example, estimated that between 2017 and 2022, prescript ion 
drug spending at list (gross) prices grew 7.4 percent, while payer net spending increased 4.5 percent and spending 
at manufacturer net prices  increa sed 5.6 percent. Because the volume component of each of these spending 
estimates is the same,the differences among them are due to differences between trends in gross and net prices. 
See IQVIA Institute for Human Data Sciences, The Use of Medicines in the U.S. 2023, April 2023 
(https://www.iqvia.com/-/media/iqvia/pdfs/institute-reports/the-use-of-medicines -in-the-us-2023/the -use-of-
med
icines-in-the-us-2023.pdf), p.27. In addition, Mallatt et al. (2024) find thatlist prices of retail drugs grew by an 
ave
rage of 9.1 percentannually between 2007 and 2020 but pricesafter rebates grew by an average of 4.3 percent 
annually over the same period. 
• RAND analyzed the first two years of RxDC data and found that ratios of total spending net of rebates 
to g
ross spending including rebates were 0.80 in 2020 and 0.78 in 2021, with variation a cross 
therapeutic class, market segment, and state. k Rebates therefore accounted for 20-22 percent of 
gross drug spending in employer-sponsored and individual market plans in the RxDC data,  a  s ma ller 
share than the 31 percent in Medicare Part Dl or the 53 percent in Medicaid. m 
k Market segments are categories of different types of private health insurance coverage. RxDC specifies seven 
market segments: self-insured large employer plans, self-insured small employer plans, fully-insured large group 
plans, fully-insured small group plans, individual plans, student health plans, and FEHB plans. 
l Direct and Indirect Remunera tion (DIR), which includes pharmacy fees as well as PBM rebates, accounted for31.3 
percent of Medicare Part D gross drug costs incalendaryear 2022. Table IV.B8 of the 2024Medicare Trustees Report 
(https://www.cms.gov/oact/tr/2024) presents historical and projected DIR as a share of gross drug costs for 
Med
icare Part D . 
m Medicaid rebates represented 52.8 percent of gross drug spending in Fiscal Year 2021. ASPE calculation from da t a 
in https://www.macpac.gov/wp-content/uploads/202 2/12/MACSTATS_Dec2022_WEB -508.pdf, pp. 74-76. 
Contribution of Prescription Drug Costs in Contributing to Changes in Premiums 
• Previous work by ASPE and literature cited by RAND in the RAND Background Report indicate that 
cons
umers are highly sensitive to premiums and consider premiums more than expected out -of-
pocket costs when choosing health insurance plans, which would give plans an incentive to increase 
out-of-pocket costs rather than premiums when faced with increases in prescription drug prices. 
November 2024 REPORT TO CONGRESS 6 
===PAGE 7===
    
     
       
   
  
     
  
      
     
       
        
 
 
     
            
 
     
     
   
 
    
   
        
 
 
   
   
  
     
 
   
  
      
 
    
 
  
              
 
• In a technical expert panel convened by ASPE with RAND contractor support, some participants in the 
pane
l mentioned that plans and issuers may respond to increases in prescription drug costs with 
changes to formularies or utilization management rather than premium increases. 
Improving RxDC 
RxDC development over the past three-and-a-half years has appropriately focused on devel oping 
regulations and guidance, building the data collection platform, and establishing relationships with 
submitting entities (plan sponsors, PBMs, issuers, third-party administrators (TPAs), and other 
organizations). Nevertheless, RAND encountered some limitations when analyzing the data, which are 
detailed later in this report . Experience with the first round of data submission for 2020 and 2021 
indicates that some improvements to the RxDC data would allow ASPE and the Departments to offer 
expanded analyses in future reports. 
Overview of Report 
ASPE developed this report to provide background on the prescription drug market, discuss the need for 
RxDC, and summarize the findings from the initial two years of RxDC. n This report contains the following 
sections: 
n The RAND Background Report, prepared by RAND Health Care under contract to ASPE, provides a detailed 
description of the data and reports the findings from RAND’s analyses of the data. It may be found at 
https://aspe.hhs.gov/. 
• Background: Prescription Drug Coverage , BenefitDesign, and the Pricing of Retail Prescription 
Dru
gs lays out the background on prescription drug coverage, spending, and pricing in the US 
that led to the development of RxDC. It discusses recent trends in prescription drug coverage 
and benefits, reviews the functioning of the market for prescription drugs and how prescription 
drugs are priced, and discusses the potential impact of drug pricing on cost-sharing and 
affordability. 
• The Need for RxDC lays out the Federal statutory requirement for private health insurance plans 
and i
ssuers to submit data on prescription drug spending annually to the Departments.  It 
explains how RxDC will help improve our understanding of retail prescription drug prices and 
spending in private health insurance coverage. 
• Brief Description of the 2020 and 2021 RxDC and Initial Findings describes the format of the 
fi
rst two years of RxDC, describes the limitations encountered when using the data, and 
summarizes the results of illustrative analyses RAND conducted on the initial two years of data. 
o The initial results for the first two years of data show the potential for increasing our 
under
standing of prescription drug reimbursements in private health insurance 
coverage and prescription drug pricing trends in the private health insurance coverage 
market. 
o However, certain limitations of the data precluded analysis of some questions of 
int
erest to policymakers such as the contribution of prescription drug price changes to 
changes in private health insurance premiums. 
November 2024 REPORT TO CONGRESS 7 
===PAGE 8===
    
    
  
• Conclusion reviews the results, presents suggestions for improving the data, and discusses 
opportunities for further analyses. 
November 2024 REPORT TO CONGRESS 8 
===PAGE 9===
    
    
      
        
        
       
     
         
      
       
  
      
    
         
           
    
       
     
    
 
        
        
    
   
       
    
    
   
      
  
  
       
        
 
     
   
  
I.  Background:  Prescription Drug Coverage,  Benefit Design,  and the Pricing  
of Retail Prescription Drugs  
Trends in Prescription Drug Coverage and Benefits 
Private health insurance coverage, which financed 38% of total retail drug spending in 2022 according to 
the NHEA, is by far the largest source of prescription drug coverage for Americans. o, p Most private health 
insurance coverage includes prescription drug insurance coverage. Most small group and individual 
health insurance plans are required by the ACA to offer prescription drug coverage. Large group market 
plans and self-insured plans are not required to offer prescription drug coverage, but RAND found in its 
analysis of the MEPS-HC that, from 2014 to 2020, over 90 percent of individuals enrolled in private group 
health insurance coverage had prescription drug coverage. Some individual (non-group) health insurance 
coverage is not required to offer prescription drug benefits, and prescription drug coverage rates were 
much lower among those enrolled in such coverage, standing at just over 60 percent in 2020. q 
o Private health insurance coverage may be divided into private group health insurance coverage and p r ivate 
individual (non-group)health insurancecove rage. In this report, private group health insurancecoverage includes 
employer-sponsored coverage (both self-insured and fully-insured, and both large group and smallgroup), coverage 
sponsored by employee organizations such as unions, and coverage sponsored jointly by both. Private individual 
(non-group) health insurance coverage includes both planssoldthrough the ACAMarketplaces(“Marketplace plans” 
or “on-Marketplace plans”) and those purchased outside the Marketplaces (“off-Marketplace plans”). 
p The NHEA may be found at https://www.cms.gov/data-research/statistics-trends-and-reports/national-health-
e
xpenditure-data/historical. The source of funds for retail prescription drug expenditures is presented in Table 16. 
q The requirement for certain hea lth insurance coverage to provide EHB was introduced by the ACA. See sect i on 
1301(a)(1)(B) of the ACA and section 2707 of the PHS Act. Large group market plans and self-insured group healt h 
plans are not required to cover EHB. Certain health plans already in force at the time the ACA was enacted that also 
meet certain other requirements (“grandfathered” plans), and certain individual and small group market plans in 
force at the time many ofthe ACA’s market reformstook effect for the 2014 plan year(“grandmothered” plans) a re 
not required to cover EHB. Plans tha t are not subject to the requirement may nonetheless offer partia l or 
comprehensive drug coverage. 
Based on RAND’s analysis of the MEPS-HC as detailed in the RAND Background Report , the estimated 
number of people with prescription drug coverage through private group health insurance coverage rose 
from 149 million in 2014 to 156 million in 2017, before falling back to 152 million in 2019. It then fell 
further to 143 million in 2020 following the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. r In the MEPS-HC data, the 
number of people with prescription drug coverage through private individual health insurance hovered 
between 9 and 11 million from 2014 to 2020. Figure 1 shows the numbers of individuals with group 
coverage, Marketplace individual (non-group) coverage, and off-Marketplace individual (non-group) 
coverage, and the shares of each category with prescription drug coverage from 2014-2020. 
r For more information on changes in health insurance coverage in the COVID-19 pandemic, see the ASPE report 
“Tracking Health Insurance Coverage in 2020 -21”, available at https://aspe.hhs.gov/reports/tracking-he alth-
i
nsurance -coverage. 
November 2024 REPORT TO CONGRESS 9 
===PAGE 10===
    
 
 
    
   
          
      
     
    
      
     
   
Figure 1.  Number and Percentage of Group  Market  and  Individual  (Non-Group)  Market  Health  
Insurance  Plan Members Reporting Having Prescription Drug Coverage Under their Health  Plan,  2014– 
2020  
Source: RAND analysis of the 2014- 2020 MEPS-HC. 
Note:  On-Marketplace coverage includes all individual (non-g roup) plans purchased through the Marketplaces. Off-
Marketplace coverage includes all  individual  (non-group)  plans purchased outside the Marketplaces.  In the ME PS-
HC,  Marketplace coverage includes coverage purchased in all types of  Marketplaces: federally-facilitated, state-
based, and state-based using the federal platform.   
Trends in Prescription Drug Benefit Design 
RAND also analyzed two data sources, the KFF Employer Health Benefits Survey and the Centers for 
Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) Center for Consumer Information and Insurance Oversight (CCIIO) 
Health Insurance Exchange Public Use Files , to examine trends in prescription drug coverage design in 
employer-sponsored group health plans and individual (non-group) plans purchased through the 
Federally-facilitated Marketplaces (FFM) and the State-based Marketplaces using the Federal Platform 
(SBM-FP). Trends in plan design measured across plans indicate out-of-pocket costs may have risen 
between 2014 and 2023. Average deductibles and average out-of-pocket maximums in both employer-
November 2024 REPORT TO CONGRESS 10 
===PAGE 11===
    
          
      
    
 
       
         
      
 
 
  
    
 
    
  
   
sponsored plans and individual (non-group) plans purchased in the FFMs and SBM -FPs increased.s As 
Figure 2 shows, formularies in employer-sponsored plans increased in complexity with a rise in the share 
of plans with 4 or more tiers, particularly from 2014 to 2018. t, u 
s These numbers were not adjusted for inflation. 
t A formulary is a list of prescription drugs covered bya health plan. It may be split into subgroups called “tiers” with 
each tier having a different copayment or coinsurance. 
u As discussed in the table note, starting in 2017, formulary tiers exclusively for specialty drugs are not being counted 
in Figure 2. The actual increase in formulary complexity may therefore have been higher. 
Figure 2. Trends in  the Distribution of Covered Workers In  Employer-Sponsored  Health  Plans  Facing  
Different Numbers of Formulary Tiers, 2014-2023  
0% 
10% 
20% 
30% 
40% 
50% 
60% 
70% 
80% 
90% 
100% 
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 
Percent of Covered Workers 
4 + Ti e rs 3 Tiers 2 Tiers Payment same regardless No cost sharing after deductible Other 
Source: RAND analysis of 2014 -2023 KFF Employer Health Benefit s Survey data. 
Note: Categories are mutually exclusive.   The survey only asks about each employer’s largest plan so this  cha rt  
represents the share of covered workers that has a plan with that number of tiers available to them. The num ber of  
formulary tiers is inclusive of any specialty -only tiers.   Starting in  2017, the survey started asking employers  
separately about formulary tiers that do not exclusively contain specialty tiers and those that do.   Prior survey years  
collected data on the number of formulary tiers but did not differentiate between the types of tiers in the same way,  
so the 2014 -2016 data may not be directly comparable to the 2017 -2024 data.    
Cost-sharing  and  utilization management  in  prescription drug coverage  
Private health insurance plans and issuers use multiple strategies to encourage effective use of medical 
services and prescription drugs by members, including setting cost -sharing for prescription drugs and 
managing drug utilization: 
November 2024 REPORT TO CONGRESS 11 
===PAGE 12===
    
         
           
           
 
       
  
 
 
    
     
     
     
    
      
     
   
   
    
        
  
 
     
        
     
      
        
           
       
    
         
         
       
      
 
   
   
     
   
   
• They can require payment of either copayments or coinsurance by members. Copayments are 
fi
xed amounts that do not vary with the total price of the prescription drug while coinsurance is 
expressed as a percentage of the drug’s total price. Plans can also vary the levels of copayments 
and coinsurance. 
• They can group prescription drugs into tiers within their formularies, with different copayments 
a
nd/or coinsurance by tier. 
• They can use utilization management rules such as step therapy, prior authorization, and quantity 
lim
its. 
• They can refuse to cover certain drugs at all, subject to certain constraints. v 
v Private health insurance coverage subject to the ACA’s EHB requirements must cover at least the greater of one 
drug in each U.S. Pharmacopeia (USP) category and class; or the same number of prescription drugs in ea ch U SP 
category and class as the applicable EHB -benchmark plan. 45 CFR 156.122(a)(1) . 
Recent evidence indicates that private health insurance plan members may be increasingly exposed to 
higher cost-sharing. As detailed in the RAND Background Report , RAND finds in its analysis of the KFF 
Employer Health Benefits Survey that employer-sponsored group health plans are increasingly shifting 
toward cost-sharing structures that make patients more sensi tive to list prices.  Since higher formulary 
tiers are more likely to require coinsurance rather than copayments as cost-sharing from the patient, this 
trend suggests that patients are more likely to be exposed to the risk of either paying large amounts in 
coinsurance or going without the drug. 
In an analysis of claims data for private health insurance plans, Mallatt et al. (2024) find that out-of-pocket 
pr
ices of retail prescription drugs rose by 5.8 percent annually between 2007 and 2020, a rate higher than 
the growth rate that they calculate for retail prescription drug prices after rebates. 4 They find that much 
of the growth is driven by increases in deductible and coinsurance payments, which are largely set on drug 
list prices. 
Understanding Prescription Drug Pricing and the Market for Prescription Drugs 
The national market for retail prescription pharmaceuticals is complex. Retail pharmaceuticals move from 
the manufacturer to the distributor to the pharmacy, and finally to the patient, with payments from one 
party to the other along each step of the way. Health insurance coverage plays a substantial and steadily 
increasing role in financing pharmaceutical purchases. E ither public or private health insurance covered 
16 percent of national prescription drug spending in 1970, 68 percent in 2000 and 85 percent in 2022 
according to the NHEA. w Private health insurance issuers and employers, and the PBMs they hire to 
manage pharmaceutical benefits, are therefore additional stakeholders in the system. 
w The NHEA may be found at https://www.cms.gov/data-research/statistics-trends-and-reports/national-h ealth-
e
xpenditure-data/historical. The source of funds for retail prescription drug expenditures is presented in Table 16. 
Figure 3, taken from the RAND Background Report, is a visual representation of the financial transactions 
that typically occur when a patient receives a brand-name prescription drug covered by insurance. T he 
green arrows show the primary financing route: the patient and insurer, plan sponsor or PBM together 
pay the pharmacy for the drug; the pharmacy in turn pays the distributor , who then pays the 
November 2024 REPORT TO CONGRESS 12 
===PAGE 13===
    
       
         
          
  
   
 
         
   
        
       
          
     
  
      
        
     
       
      
        
   
    
  
manufacturer. The blue arrows show an accompanying set of financial transactions that reduce the 
amounts paid by the PBM, plan sponsor, or insurer. Months after the transaction, the manufacturer may 
pay the PBM a rebate in return for favorable placement on the PBM’s formulary. Part or all of this rebate 
may be passed on to the insurer or plan sponsor. 
Figure 3. Illustrative Flows of Product and Payments for Retail Pharmacy-dispense d Brand-name Drugs 
The amounts shown in Figure 3 are purely illustrative; relatively little is known by the public about the 
typical percentages actually retained by each commercial entity in these transactions. Nor is very much 
known about the negotiation processes that produce the rebate amounts or the provisions of the 
contracts between PBMs and private health insurers or sponsors. In addition, for the sake of clarity, Fig ure 
3 does not show all flows of payments among entities. For example, there can be payments from the 
manufacturer back to wholesalers, or payments from manufacturers to pharmacies, on behalf of patients, 
in the form of coupons. 
Recent Increases in Drug Spending Mostly Driven by Increases in Drug Prices 
In a review of research literature, RAND reports that multiple studies have found that higher prices have 
been a significant factor in recent increases in drug spending. IQVIA found, for example, that prescription 
volume (as measured by defined daily doses) grew 1.9 percent from 2018 to 2022 while prescription drug 
spending at net prices grew 5.6 percent over the same time period, implying that much of the growth was 
driven by increases in spending per dose. 
5 Other sources have found evidence that one significant factor 
in higher drug spending is increased utilization of highly-priced pharmaceuticals such as specialty drugs, 
drugs administered in providers’ offices, and biologics.  One paper found, for example, that gross spending 
on retail specialty drugs increased 14.5 percent per year between 2010 and 2017. 6 
November 2024 REPORT TO CONGRESS 13 
===PAGE 14===
    
       
   
  
      
  
     
       
    
      
       
       
     
    
       
     
         
           
    
       
         
          
   
     
       
     
        
     
    
          
        
          
    
 
     
         
        
    
     
Rising Prescription Drug Prices Affect Adherence and Health Through Higher Cost-Sharing 
It is well- established that higher out -of-pocket costs worsen patient adherence to prescription drug 
treatment. 7,8 Patients report in surveys that costs impact their decisions to take prescription drugs and 
issues with prescription drug affordability seem to be common even among insured patients.  An 
estimated 6.6 percent of adults aged 18-64 who took prescription medication in the past year and who 
had private prescription drug coverage did not take medicine as prescribed due to cost in 2021 according 
to the National Health Interview Survey. 9 Research reviewed in a recent ASPE report found that 18.8 
percent of privately insured patients using insulin rationed their insulin because of the cost. 10 
These affordability issues can have serious consequences as adherence to prescription drug treatment 
has been shown to have significant effects on the health of patients with chronic conditions.  The effects 
of poor adherence on patient outcomes have been well -studied for diabetes, for example.  Poor 
adherence to medication by diabetes patients has been associated with increased morbidity and 
mortality, increased utilization of medical services, and higher total medical spending. 11,12 
Rising drug list prices combined with the increasing levels of rebates can have detrimental effects on 
prescription drug adherence and health for private health insurance plan members through higher cost-
sharing. Higher list prices likely induce higher cost-sharing in the short term since coinsurance is typically 
calculated as a percent of the drug’s list price, not what the plan pays for the drug net of rebates . 
However, plans may adjust their cost-sharing structures to address the tradeoff between more generous 
coverage, which provides more risk protection, and higher costs that translate into higher premiums 
instead of higher cost-sharing. On the other hand, as discussed above, plans appear to be choosing cost-
sharing structures with more formulary tiers and higher coinsurance percentages in recent years . 
Furthermore, limited evidence has been put forth that higher rebates induce higher list prices. 13,14 
When considering the tradeoff between raising premiums and raising cost-sharing when faced with rising 
drug prices, plans may face incentives to raise out-of-pocket costs rather than premiums. Some research 
has found that consumers consider premiums more than expected out-of-pocket costs when choosing 
plans, so plans might prioritize keeping premiums down to attract enrollees. 15,16 Other studies suggest 
that some plans deliberately choose higher cost-sharing over raising premiums to discourage selection of 
the plan by consumers with high-cost drug needs. 17,18 
The magnitudes of the effects of higher pricing on cost-sharing and on premiums are unclear at this point, 
which makes it hard to assess potential policy solutions. Furthermore, r esearchers, analys t s, and 
policymakers have raised questions about issues such as the business practices of PBMs and the 
downstream effects on patients of the highlevel of concentration in the PBM market. 19,20, 21 
As outlined in the RAND Background Report, none of the currently available data sources used for studying 
the private health insurance market give a complete and detailed perspective on drug net prices or 
rebates in that market. Therefore, little is known about the post-rebate prices being paid by plans even 
though those prices are what go into the plans’ true costs.  Commercial data sources such as IQVIA’s 
National Sales Perspective data give gross prices received by the manufacturer while sources such as 
medical claims data or the MEPS-HC give the prices paid at the point of sale (including pharmacy costs) 
November 2024 REPORT TO CONGRESS 14 
===PAGE 15===
    
        
 
      
  
     
          
   
          
         
      
     
   
     
      
  
  
 
  
 
    
  
     
   
      
        
         
    
    
      
          
  
  
   
      
     
    
with no information on rebates, which are paid months later.  The NHEA measure s prescription drug 
spending with payer rebates netted out at an aggregated level. 
II.  The Need for RxDC   
The pricing of retail prescription drugs in private health insurance has the potential to significantly affect 
access to and spending on drugs for millions of Americans. The complexities of the pharmaceutical pricing 
system and the gaps in our understanding of the impact of the system on prescription drug spending and 
cost-sharing, health insurance premiums in the private market, and member welfare and health have led 
to a need for data on the rebates being paid by private health insurance plans and issuers. The goal of 
RxDC is to contribute to greater transparency in the pricing of prescription drugs by filling in this gap. T he 
Secretary of HHS specifically cited RxDC as one of the administrative actions being undertaken by CMS to 
improve transparency in the prescription drug industry and increase our understanding of the impact of 
prescription drug rebates on premiums and out-of-pocket costs. 
22 
RxDC Can Help Answer Basic Questions 
RxDC has the potential to answer a number of important yet basic questions relating to prescription drug 
benefits in private health insurance coverage and to prescription drug pricing. These include: 
• What are the trends in gross and net pharmaceutical spending by private health insurance 
coverage market segment and therapeutic class? 
• What are the trends in health insurance premiums and in employer/employee 
contributions? 
• How do rebates in the private health insurance coverage market compare with rebates in 
Medicare and Medicaid? 
• How do different categories of spending such as prescription drugs, outpatient services, and 
inpatient services contribute to premiums? 
Some of these questions may be answered with the RxDC system in place for the two first years, as 
discussed in the next section. Other questions are harder to address and will require both further 
improvements to RxDC and additional data analysis. The last question in the list above will be particularly 
challenging to answer , even with more detailed data than is currently available , as p rivate health 
insurance plans and issuers consider many factors simultaneously when setting premiums. Moreover, 
other factors, such as the market environment for plans, will not be observed in the data but might affect 
the level of premiums. Breaking out the separate contributions of different categories will require both 
great expertise and careful analysis of complete and detailed data. 
Introduction to RxDC 
Under Division BB, Title II, Section 204 of the CAA, private health insurance plans and issuers must annually 
submit data to the Departments on premiums, enrollment, nondrug medical spending, spending on 
prescription drugs, and prescription drug rebates . Under 5 U.S.C. 8910, OPM mus t make a continuing 
study of the operation and administration of the FEHB Program, including surveys and reports on FEHB 
November 2024 REPORT TO CONGRESS 15 
===PAGE 16===
    
       
       
       
   
       
          
      
  
   
  
  
       
 
   
    
   
      
        
       
   
     
    
    
     
         
   
 
 
   
    
 
 
  
  
plans and on the experience of these plans. Pursuant to its authority under section 8910, OPM has joined 
the Departments to promote transparency in FEHB prescription drug and health care spending by 
requiring FEHB carriers to report information to the Departments, consistent with Section 204 and 
implementing regulations issued by the Departments and OPM. 
The Departments and OPM issued regulations and designed data templates for RxDC. x Pursuant to these 
regulations, TPAs and PBMs may submit data on behalf of private health insurance plans and issuers. In 
this report, we refer to the private health insurance plans and issuers , TPAs, PB Ms, and other 
organizations who submit data as part of RxDC as “submitting entities.” 
x The regulations relating to RxDC may be found at https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2021/11/23/2021-
25
183/prescription -drug-and-health-care-spending. 
Section 204 directed the Secretary of HHS as follows: 
[T]he Secretary, acting through the Assistant Secretary of Planning and Evaluation and in 
co
ordination with the Inspector General of the Department of Health and Human Services, shall 
make available on the internet website of the Department of Health and Human Services a report 
on prescription drug reimbursements under group health plans and group and individual health 
insurance coverage, prescription drug pricing trends, and the role of prescription drug costs in 
contributing to premium increases or decreases under such plans or coverage, aggregated in such 
a way as no drug or plan specific information will be made public. 
Similar statutory mandates apply to DOL and UST with regard to the private health insurance coverage 
under
 their regulatory authority. The Departments and OPMagreed toissue one report covering all plans 
subject to the Section 204 reporting requirements as well as FEHB plans. 
III.   Brief  Description of  the 2020 and 2021 RxDC  and  Initial Findings   
Brief Description of RxDC 
In RxDC, submitting entities are required to submit a variety of information about prescription drug 
spending and rebates, medical services spending, and premiums. Each submission for the years 2020 and 
2021 consisted of between one and eight data tables labelled D1 through D8 along with documentation 
of plan characteristics and narrative responses to certain questions. The submitted data was aggregated 
by each submitting entity to the market segment, state, and year level. Table 1 summarizes the contents 
of the eight templates. 
Table 1. RxDC Data Template Contents 
Data 
Template 
Short Description Content 
D1 Premium and life years Average premiums, total premiums, member 
life-years 
November 2024 REPORT TO CONGRESS 16 
===PAGE 17===
    
 
   
    
 
  
 
  
  
  
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
     
     
  
 
    
 
 
 
     
        
     
      
   
   
      
         
       
        
         
     
 
       
    
           
 
    
     
    
  
  
Data 
Template 
Short Description Content 
D2 Medical spending other than retail 
prescription drugs 
Spending and cost-sharing by medical 
spending categories 
D3 Top 50 most frequently dispensed 
brands of retail prescription drugs 
Net spending, number of paid claims, number 
of utilizing members, dosage units, cost-
sharing for 50 drugs 
D4 Top 50 most costly retail prescription 
drugs 
Net spending, number of paid claims, number 
of utilizing members, dosage units, cost-
sharing for 50 drugs 
D5 Top 50 retail prescription drugs with 
largest spending increases 
Net spending, number of paid claims, number 
of utilizing members, dosage units, cost -
sharing for 50 drugs 
D6 Total retail prescription drug spending Net spending, rebates totaled across all drugs 
D7 Rebates by therapeutic class of drug Net spending, number of paid claims, number 
of utilizing members, dosage units, cost-
sharing, rebates for all therapeutic classes 
D8 Rebates for the top 25 drugs Net spending, number of paid claims, number 
of utilizing members, dosage units, cost-
sharing, rebates for 25 drugs 
Limitations of the Initial Two Years of RxDC 
As a new data collection effort, the first two years of submission of RxDC data contained valuable 
information but, at the same time, had limitations, which are identified in the RAND Background Report. 
Two of the most significant limitations and their consequences can be described as follows: 
• Templates D1 and D2, which contained nondrug data, were often aggregated to the plan or issuer 
l
evel and typically submitted by the private health insurance plan or issuer. Templates D3 through 
D8, which contained drug data, were sometimes submitted by the plan or issuer’s PBM with the 
data aggregated with those of other plans that the PBM served. RAND found that in many cases, 
it was not possible to directly link data from the same underlying health plan across the eight 
required templates for the purposes of conducting the analyses of the first two years of data 
collection described here and in its report. 
y Because of this limitation, RAND was not able to use 
the RxDC data to address the role of prescription drug costs in contributing to changes in premium 
levels. 
y RAND assessed the success of linkages using the unit ofRxDC reporting level combination, whichis a combination 
of submitting entity, market segment, state, and year. Less than half ofreporting level combinations submittingthe 
first template (D1), with data on premiums and life years, can be linked to reporting level combinations submitting 
the seventh template (D7), with data on rebates. Overall, RAND reports that only 10.6 percent of reporting level 
combinations consisted of a full set of ei ght templates that could be linked together in its analysis. 
• While the instructions indicate that reported spending must be spending by the plan or issuer,  it 
a
ppears in some cases that the reported spending aggregated at the PBM level in templates D3 
through D8 was spending by the PBM that submitted the data. W hen PBMs retain a portion of 
November 2024 REPORT TO CONGRESS 17 
===PAGE 18===
    
     
        
    
       
       
     
        
        
    
   
    
   
     
 
   
            
        
        
         
    
      
  
     
 
       
 
      
        
     
  
      
      
          
        
 
  
     
 
negotiated rebates and do not pass them on to the plan sponsor or issuer, the amounts reported 
via RxDC may include those amounts. This limits the ability to use the data to understand what 
portion of rebates is retained by PBMs. 
The Departments and OPM are working together to make the data more useful for analysis. For example, 
t
hey are looking for opportunities to improve the consistency of the aggregation of data and to facilitate 
linkages among templates from related entities , for example between the enrollment, premium, and 
nondrug spending data submitted by a plan or issuer or TPA and the drug spending data submitted by a 
PBM on the plan or issuer’s behalf. Such changes could, for example, allow the Departments and OPM to 
estimate in future Reports to Congress rebates and prescription drug spending per member per month by 
market segment and by state, and to better compare the contributions of changes in drug spending and 
changes in nondrug health spending to changes in premiums for employer -sponsored and individual 
market health coverage. When considering these improvements to RxDC, the Departments will engage 
with stakeholders and consider the tradeoffs with the data submission burden to submitting entities and 
implementation costs to the government. 
Illustrative Analyses of 2020 and 2021 RxDC Data 
RAND conducted a set of “illustrative analyses” of the first two years of RxDC to show the potential 
usefulness of the data. Due to challenges related to linking templates containing data from the same 
health insurance plan, RAND only conducted analyses on data from one template at a time. RAND warns 
that the data for each template used for the analyses are not necessarily representative of the entities 
who were required to submit data nor of the entities who actually submitted data. For this reason, datasets 
used in the analyses can be thought of as convenience samples, although all analyses used the full universe 
of applicable submitted data after deduplication. 
The following are the contents and results of RAND’s analyses, briefly summarized. The full results may 
be
 found in the RAND Background Report. 
Ratios of net to gross prescription drug spending overall, by market segment, and by geography 
RxDC requires the submission in template D6 of the total amount spent on prescription drugs by health 
insurance plans and members net of rebates (“net spending”) and, separately, of the amount received by 
plans in the form of rebates. RAND calculates gross spending as the sum of net spending and rebates a nd 
then calculates the ratio of net to gross spending. This ratio can be interpreted as an approximation to 
the ratio of net to gross prices (or one minus the rebate discount across all drugs). 
RAND found the ratio of net spending to gross spending across all market segments to be 0.80 in 2020 
a
nd 0.78 in 2021. Interpreting these figures as price ratios would imply average discounts of 20 percent 
in 2020 and 22 percent in 2021.  The ratios are slightly higher than estimates from other sources , but 
those other sources used different methods or were either based on or include the non-private market.z 
z The 2024 Medicare Trustees Report analyzed the Medicare market and found that direct and indirect remunera t ion 
(which includes rebates and fees) were 31.3% of Part D expenditures in calendar year 2022(Table IV.B8), implying a 
November 2024 REPORT TO CONGRESS 18 
===PAGE 19===
    
  
 
       
      
 
 
As shown in Table 2, RAND found only slight variations in ratios across market segments  with higher ratios  
in self-insured  small employer  plans,  individual plans,  and student plans, and the lowest ratio in self-
insured large employer plans.   While RAND found a larger degree of variation across states, differences in 
the  shares  of plans in each market  segment,  patient case mix, and practice patterns  likely  explains some  
of  this variation.  Appendix  A  lists ratios of net to gross spending by state.   
net-to-gross spending ratio of 0.71. IQVIA (2022) finds that the net-to-gross spending ratio for all medicines is 0.76 
but their estimate is approximate and based on proprietary modelling. Mulcahy et al. (2021) finds a net-to-gross 
spending ratio of 0.67 but their estimates are based on net spending from the manufacturer perspective, not on 
what final payers pay. 
November 2024 REPORT TO CONGRESS 19 
===PAGE 20===
    
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
     
 
     
 
     
 
 
 
     
 
      
      
 
 
 
 
     
 
  
 
     
 
Table 2. Ratio of Net to Gross Spending in the 2020 and 2021 RxDC Data, Overall and by Market 
Segment 
2020 2021 
Market 
segment 
RxDC  
Reporting  
Level  
Combinations  
(count in  
millions)  
Gross Spending 
($ millions) 
Net to Gross 
Ratio 
Gross Spending 
($ millions) 
Net to Gross 
Ratio 
All market 
segments 17,493 190,006 0.795 199,083 0.779 
Self-insured 
large employer 
plans 
7,213 101,140 0.782 106,993 0.767 
Fully-insured 
small group 
plans 
4,796 17,167 0.799 16,851 0.779 
Fully-insured 
large group 
plans 
3,075 39,675 0.797 38,724 0.776 
Self-insured 
small employer 
plans 
1,761 3,884 0.821 4,139 0.808 
Individual 
market 425 21,740 0.839 25,434 0.825 
Student market 148 650 0.833 643 0.803 
Federal 
Employees 
Health Benefits 
plans 
75 5,749 0.798 6,300 0.792 
Source: RAND analysis of RxDC data from the total prescription drug volume and spending template (D6) 
(April 26, 2023, extract). 
Note: An RxDC reporting level combination is a combination of submitting entity, market segment, state,  
and year.  Net total spending on prescription drugs is reported as total spending in the total prescription 
drug volume  and spending table (D6).  Gross total spending is calculated as net spending plus rebates  
(current  year total rebates/fees/other remuneration).   Further  details on how  the  dataset was constructed 
and the calculation of spending ratios  may be found in the accompanying RAND Background Report.  
Ratios of net to gross prescription drug spending by therapeutic class 
RAND calculated the same ratios for five selected therapeutic classes of drugs: 
November 2024 REPORT TO CONGRESS 20 
===PAGE 21===
    
    
  
    
     
     
      
          
         
        
        
       
        
      
     
      
          
        
          
          
   
    
       
     
       
     
  
      
         
     
     
   
        
• Factor Xa inhibitors (oral anticoagulants) 
• Insulin analogs 
• Tumor necrosis factor blockers (biologic anti-inflammatory agents) 
• Glucagon-like peptide (GLP)-1 receptor antagonists (antihyperglycemics) 
• Kinase inhibitors (biologic oncology drugs) 
These classes were selected to cover a range of net-to-gross ratios. Previous work indicated that the first 
four classes in the list had ratios of spending at net prices to spending at gross prices significantly below 
1, suggesting a high level of rebates, and that the fifth class, kinase inhibitors, had a ratio of close to 1, 
suggesting little rebating. 23 The RAND analysis of RxDC data found similar ratios with insulin analogs,  for 
example, having a ratio of 0.50 and kinase inhibitors a ratio of 0.98. RAND suggests that the difference in 
ratios results from the three insulin analogs in their class being close therapeutic substitutes (drugs used 
on similar conditions with similar effects) with one another while the drugs within the kinase inhibitor 
class are notsubstitutes. The existence of therapeutic substitutesincreases the bargaining power of PBMs 
when negotiating prices with manufacturers, leading to the manufacturers paying larger rebates. 
Ratios of patient cost-sharing to net and gross spending by therapeutic class 
RAND calculated ratios of patient cost -sharing to both net and gross spending for the same five 
therapeutic classes and separately for 2020 and 2021. The ratio of cost-sharing to spending at net prices 
rose slightly for four of the five classes, even as the ratio of overall net to gross spending fell, suggesting 
that the growth in rebates, which is leading to relative decreases in net prices, may not be resulting in 
lower cost-sharing for patients in the submitted data. 
Implied gross and net prices by therapeutic class 
RAND calculated the implied average gross and net prices per claim for the same five therapeutic classes 
in both 2020 and 2021 based on submitted spending and volume information. Both net and gross prices 
generally rose from 2020 to 2021 but the price increase was above general inflation for only one of the 
five classes of drugs (factor Xa inhibitors). 
Comparison of ranked drug lists 
The submitting entities submitted ranked lists of the 50 drugs with the most net spending and the 50 
mostly frequently dispensed brand-name drugs. Under the disclosure restrictions in Section 204, 
prohibiting HHS from disclosing any confidential or trade secret information submitted to it under RxDC, 
we cannot provide information on specific drugs in this report but can analyze general patterns in the 
rankings. 
Whi
ch drugs  appeared on the ranked lists  (top 50  most frequently  dispense prescription drugs, top 50  
most costly retail prescription drugs, and top 50  prescription drugs with the  largest spending increases)  
differed substantially  across plans,  but  RAND found evidence  of  strong correlations across lists .   Drugs  
that had lower  average ranks on the  lists they appeared on also appeared  on a higher  percentage of  lists.   
Fo
r example, in the 2020 data, drugs that fall, on average, in the top ten drugs by spending across plans 
November 2024 REPORT TO CONGRESS 21 
===PAGE 22===
    
       
         
    
          
     
    
    
      
        
      
      
          
      
   
    
      
 
         
     
    
       
     
      
          
  
      
        
           
  
     
        
     
  
      
 
    
in the lists that they appear on are also all listed on at least 20 percent of all lists. By contrast, most of the 
drugs whose spending ranks them, on average, in the 30 th position or above appear on less than 20 
percent of all lists. aa 
aa See Figure 5.7 , Panel A in the RAND Background Report . 
A few drugs appeared on a small percentage of the lists of drugs with the greatest amounts of net 
spending while being highly ranked on the lists they did appear on; RAND suggested their absence on 
other lists may have reflected the successful negotiation of rebates for the plans submitting data. 
IV.  Conclusion  
An estimated 143 million Americans had prescription drug insurance coverage through health insurance 
plans, either through their or a family member’s employment, and 11 million had it through health 
insurance coverage purchased in the individual market in 2020 according to the MEPS-HC. As discussed 
above in Section I, recent evidence indicates that members of private health insurance plans are 
increasingly exposed to higher out-of-pocket costs in recent years. To better understand trends in private 
health insurance coverage, and the role of prescription drug spending, Section 204 of Title II of Division 
BB of the CAA established a new data collection from private health insurance plans and issuers including 
information about enrollment, premiums, drug, and other medical spending. 
This report and the RAND Background Report have presented key findings on these issues from exis t ing 
data
 and literature, and also presented initial findings fromRAND’s analysis ofthe first two years ofRxDC. 
The new data indicate that: 
• The ratio of net spending to gross spending in private health insurance coverage averaged 0.80 in 
2020 and 
0.78 in 2021, with some variation by market segment and state. If we interpret these 
ratios as price ratios, this evidence suggests that the net-to-gross price ratios in the private health 
insurance coverage market are higher than the equivalent ratios seen in Medicare and Medicaid. 
Higher net-to-gross price ratios in the private health insurance coverage market suggest th at 
rebates and other remuneration are lower in that market than in Medicare and Medicaid. 
• Net-to-gross spending ratios varied by therapeutic class , in line with the results of previous 
resea
rch on rebates from the manufacturer perspective by therapeutic class. 
• Between 2020 and 2021, ratios of cost-sharing to spending at net prices rose slightly for four of 
five t
herapeutic classes chosen for this analysis, even as the ratio of overall net to gross spending 
fell. RAND suggest s that growth in rebates is leading to relative decreases in net prices but that 
this decrease may not be reflected in lower cost-sharing for patients. 
Private health insurance coverage is the largest source of prescription drug coverage for Americans. As 
summ
arized above, research has found that higher gross prices for certain specialty drugs appear to have 
been a significant factor in recent increases in drug spending , spending at net prices was growing at a 
slower rate than spending at gross prices, and spending at both kinds of prices was growing faster than 
drug volume alone. Understanding trends in drug prices paid by private health insurance plans and issuers 
November 2024 REP ORT TO CONGRESS 22 
===PAGE 23===
    
       
         
        
       
     
  
  
is, therefore, becoming increasingly important. Previously, no regular data source existed, however, that 
tracks drug prices and rebates in the private health insurance coverage market. The new results from 
RxDC are a valuable first contribution to understanding prescription drug rebates in the private health 
insurance market . Going forward, data quality should improve as submitting entities become more 
accustomed to gathering and submitting their data and as the Departments consider if any changes should 
be made to the RxDC requirements. These changes may allow for deeper analyses of the relationship s 
between drug spending and premiums. 
November 2024 REPORT TO CONGRESS 23 
===PAGE 24===
    
    
 
 
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
Appendix A. Ratio of Net to Gross Spending by Geography in the 2020 and 2021 
RxDC Data 
Geography 
RxDC 
Reporting  
Level  
Combinations  
(count in 
millions)  
Gross Spending 
2020 ($ millions)  
Net to  
Gross 
Ratio 2020  
Gross Spending 
2021 ($millions)  
Net to  
Gross 
Ratio  
2021  
All geographies 17,493 190,006 0.795 199,083  0.779 
Alabama 110 2,742 0.804 3,098  0.777 
A
laska 51 303 0.812 327  
0.803 
A
rizona 182 2,670 0.786 2,261  
0.762 
A
rkansas 105 1,627 0.810 1,840  
0.798 
C
alifornia 551 15,362 0.830 14,141  
0.809 
C
olorado 169 2,393 0.838 2,280  
0.822 
C
onnecticut 316 3,067 0.787 3,453  
0.754 
D
elaware 217 962 0.793 1,017  
0.777 
District of 
Columbia 87 4,383 0.780 4,643  0.765 
F
lorida 1,456 10,294 0.791 11,558  
0.772 
G
eorgia 374 6,384 0.788 6,531  
0.775 
G
uam 10 64 0.819 69  
0.797 
H
awaii 42 1,025 0.813 1,066  
0.803 
I
daho 82 864 0.929 766  
0.906 
I
llinois 685 8,718 0.769 10,122  
0.756 
I
ndiana 640 2,076 0.785 2,024  
0.768 
Io
wa 157 1,285 0.805 1,415  
0.794 
K
ansas 141 1,202 0.756 1,304  
0.746 
K
entucky 217 2,034 0.808 2,479  
0.783 
Lo
uisiana 201 2,647 0.821 2,876  
0.787 
Ma
ine 85 775 0.813 532  
0.799 
M
aryland 252 5,198 0.792 5,681  
0.779 
M
assachusetts 228 4,493 0.794 5,203  
0.782 
M
ichigan 453 3,990 0.787 3,921  
0.791 
M
innesota 129 5,986 0.796 6,089  0.
774 
M
ississippi 107 662 0.790 762  
0.750 
M
issouri 233 4,055 0.790 4,237  
0.780 
Montana 99 263 0.804 282  
0.790 
N
ebraska 86 962 0.759 995  
0.743 
N
evada 116 1,196 0.780 1,105  
0.750 
Ne
w Hampshire 60 814 0.793 685  
0.780 
N
ew Jersey 321 5,692 0.763 6,325  
0.742 
N
ew Mexico 68 630 0.769 668  
0.763 
Ne
w York 503 13,328 0.783 13,790  
0.765 
N
orth Carolina 247 7,155 0.765 7,478  
0.755 
North Dakota 29 528 0.765 574  0.763 
November 2024 REPORT TO CONGRESS 24 
===PAGE 25===
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
       
      
      
    
 
 
 
  
RxDC 
Reporting 
Level Net to 
Combinations Net to Gross 
Geography 
(count in 
millions) 
Gross Spending 
2020 ($ millions) 
Gross 
Ratio 2020 
Gross Spending 
2021 ($millions) 
Ratio 
2021 
Ohio 1,562 7,583 0.785 6,729 0.766 
Oklahoma 443 1,688 0.771 1,798 0.758 
Oregon 121 2,002 0.842 2,084 0.825 
Pennsylvania 455 7,398 0.766 7,857 0.754 
Puerto Rico 2,085 816 0.887 1,582 0.922 
Rhode Island 85 924 0.751 982 0.747 
South Carolina 123 2,196 0.784 2,455 0.753 
South Dakota 1,384 608 0.791 697 0.791 
Tennessee 212 5,590 0.809 6,125 0.785 
Texas 719 15,318 0.766 16,909 0.754 
Utah 114 3,817 0.937 4,064 0.933 
Vermont 29 243 0.812 239 0.781 
Virginia 476 6,397 0.805 5,328 0.788 
Washington 350 5,157 0.841 5,877 0.827 
West Virginia 92 813 0.732 1,032 0.767 
Wisconsin 353 3,258 0.786 3,378 0.772 
Wyoming 67 300 0.801 275 0.784 
Source: RAND analysis of RxDC data from the total prescription drug volume and spending template (D6) (April 
26, 2023, extract). 
Note: Net total  spending on prescription drugs is reported as total spending in the total prescription drug 
volume and spending table (D6).  Gross total spending is calculated as net  spending  plus  rebates  (current  year  
total rebates/fees/other remuneration). The ratio of n et spending to gross spending is reported for RxDC  
reporting level  combinations  for which data was submitted by a single reporting entity; and further restricted to  
combinations reporting >$0 in gross total spending by the same entity in both reference yea rs. U.S. Virgin  
Islands and Northern Mariana Islands omitted due to small sample size (N<10).  RAND warns that the data for  
each  analys is are not necessarily representative of the entities who were required to submit data nor of the 
entities who actually submitted data across all templates .  
November 2024 REPORT TO CONGRESS 25 
===PAGE 26===
    
 
    
  
    
   
 
    
  
  
      
  
     
  
 
  
  
   
  
   
  
 
  
  
      
  
    
  
 
      
    
      
 
   
  
  
 
  
      
  
    
  
    
  
  
 
  
 
Endnotes 
1 Bosworth A, Sheingold S, Finegold K, Sayed BA, De Lew N, and Sommers BD. Changes in the List Prices of 
Prescription Drugs. October 2023. Available at: https://aspe.hhs.gov/reports/changes-list-prices-prescription-drugs. 
2 Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 (Pub. L. 116-260), Division BB, Title II, Section 204 added parallel provisions 
at section 9825 of the Internal Revenue Code (the Code), section 725 of the Employee Retirement Income Security 
Act (ERISA), and section 2799A-10 of the Public Health Service Act (PHS Act). 
3 Mallatt J, Dunn A, and Fernando L. 2024. “Consumer Out-of-Pocket Drug Prices Grew Faster Than Prices Faced By 
Insurers After Accounting For Rebates,” Health Affairs, Vol. 43, No. 9. 
4 Ibid. 
5 IQVIA, The Use of Medicines in the U.S. 2023. April 2023. Available at: 
https://www.iqvia.com/-/media/iqvia/pdfs/institute-reports/the-use-of-medicines-in-the-us-2023/the-use-of-
medicines-in-the-us-2023.pdf. 
6 Hill SC, Miller GE and Ding Y. 2020. “Net Spending on Retail Specialty Drugs Grew Rapidly, Especially for Private 
Insurance and Medicare Part D,” Health Affairs, Vol. 39, No. 11. 
7 Heidari P, Cross W, and Crawford K. 2018. “Do out-of-pocket costs affect medication adherence in adults wit h 
rheumatoid arthritis? A systematic review.” Seminar in Arthritis and Rheumatism, 48(1): 12-21. 
8 Reynolds E, Burke J, Banerjee M, Kerber K, Skolarus L, Magliocco B, Esper G, and Callaghan B. 2020. “Association of 
out-of-pocket costs on adherence to common neurologic medications.” Neurology 94(13): e1415-e1426. 
9 Mykyta L and Cohen RA. Characteristics of Adults Aged 18-64 Who Did Not Take Medication as Prescribed to Reduce 
Costs: United States, 2021. June 2023. Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/databriefs/db470.pdf. 
10 Gaffney A, Himmelstein D U and Woolhandler S, “Prevalence and Correlates of Patient Rationing of Insulin in t he 
United States: A National Survey.” Annals of internal medicine, 175(11), 1623–1626.  https://doi.org/10.7326/M22-
2477 . Cited in Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation, U.S. Department of Health and Hum an 
Services. Report on the Affordability of Insulin. December 2022. Available at: https://aspe.hhs.gov/reports/insulin-
affordability-rtc. 
11 Polonsky W and Henry R. 2016.“Poor medication adherence in type 2 diabetes: Recognizing the scope of the 
problem and its key contributors.” Patient Preferences and Adherence, 10, 1299-1307. 
https://doi.org/10.2147%2FPPA.S106821. 
12 Evans M, Engberg S, Faurby M, Fernandes J, Hudson P, and Polonsky, W. 2022. “Adherence to and persist ence 
with antidiabetic medications and associations with clinical and economic outcomes in people with type 2 diabet es 
mellitus: A systematic literature review.” Diabetes, Obesity & Metabolism, 24(3), 377–390. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/dom.14603. 
13 Sood N, Ribero R, Ryan M, and Van Nuys K, The Association Between Drug Rebates and List Prices, USC Sc haeffer 
Center, 2020. 
14 Yeung K, Dusetzina SB, and Basu A, “Association of Branded Prescription Drug Rebate Size and Patient Out-of-
Pocket Costs in a Nationally Representative Sample, 2007-2018,” JAMA Network Open, Vol. 4, No. 6, 2021. 
15 DeLeire T and Marks C. October 2015. Consumer Decisions Regarding Health Plan Choices, in the 2014 and 2015 
Marketplaces. Available at: https://aspe.hhs.gov/reports/consumer-decisions-regarding-health-plan-choic es-2014-
2015-marketplaces-0. 
16 Abaluck J and Gruber J. 2011 “Choice Inconsistencies Among the Elderly: Evidence from Plan Choice in the 
Medicare Part D Program,” American Economic Review, Vol. 101, No. 4. 
17 Geruso M, Layton T, and Prinz D. 2019. “Screening in Contract Design: Evidence from  the ACA Health Insura nce 
Exchanges.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, May. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34012503/. 
18 Carey, C. 2017. “Technological Change and Risk Adjustment: Benefit Design Incentives in Medicare Part D.” 
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 9 (1): 38-73. 
19 Seeley E and Kesselheim AS. Pharmacy Benefit Managers: Practices, Controversies, and What Lies Ahead. March 
2019. Accessed at https://www.commonwealthfund.org/sites/default/files/2019-
03/Seeley_pharmacy_benefit_managers_ib_v2.pdf. 
November 2024 REPORT TO CONGRESS 26 
===PAGE 27===
    
 
  
   
  
 
  
  
      
  
        
  
20 Minority Staff of the U.S. Senate Committee on Finance. A Tangled Web: An Examination of the Drug Supply and 
Payment Chains. June 2018. Available at https://www.scribd.com/document/382721468/A-Tangled-Web. 
21 Garthwaite C and Scott Morton F. Perverse Market Incentives Encourage High Prescription Drug Prices. 
November 2017. Available at https://www.promarket.org/2017/11/01/perverse-market-incentives-encourage-
high-prescription-drug-prices/. 
22 Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 
Comprehensive Plan for Addressing High Drug Prices: A Report in Response to the Executive Order on Competit ion 
in the American Economy . September 2021. Available at: https://aspe.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/2021-
09/Drug_Pricing_Plan_9-9-2021.pdf. 
23 Mulcahy A W, Schwam D, Rao P, RennaneS, and Shetty K. 2021.“Estimated Savings from International Reference 
Pricing for Prescription Drugs,” JAMA, Vol. 326, No. 17. 
November 2024 REPORT TO CONGRESS 27 
===PAGE 28===
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
   
 
 
This communication was printed, published, or produced and disseminated at U.S. taxpayer expense. 
Links and references to information from non-governmental organizations are provided for informational 
purposes and are not HHS endorsements, recommendations, or preferences for the non-governmental 
organizations. 
November 2024 REPORT TO CONGRESS 28 