
===PAGE 1===
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PRESCRIPTION 
DRUGS 
Selected States' 
Regulation of 
Pharmacy Benefit 
Managers 
 
 
Report to Congressional Requesters 
March 2024 
 
GAO-24-106898 
 
 
United States Government Accountability Office 

===PAGE 2===
 United States Government Accountability Office 
 
March 2024 
PRESCRIPTION DRUGS 
Selected States’ Regulation of Pharmacy Benefit 
Managers 
What GAO Found 
Private health plans contract with pharmacy benefit managers (PBM) to 
administer their prescription drug benefits and help control costs. Each of the five 
states selected for review—Arkansas, California, Louisiana, Maine, and New 
York—enacted a variety of laws to regulate PBMs. 
• Fiduciary or other “duty of care” requirements. Four of the five states
(California, Louisiana, Maine, and New York) enacted laws to impose a duty
of care on PBMs. The laws varied from imposing a fiduciary duty—that is, a
r
equirement to act in the best interest of the health plan or other entity to
w
hich the duty is owed—to what state regulators described as “lesser”
standards such as a requirement to act in “good faith and fair dealing.”
• Drug pricing and pharmacy reimbursement requirements. The five states
enacted a variety of laws relating to drug pricing and pharmacy payments,
such as laws limiting PBMs’ use of manufacturer rebates and their ability to
pay pharmacies less than they charge health plans—a practice referred to as
“spread pricing.”
• Transparency, including licensure and reporting requirements. To
increase the transparency of PBM operations, the five states enacted laws
that require PBMs to be licensed by or registered with the state, or both, and
t
o report certain information such as drug pricing, fees charged, and the
am
ounts of rebates received and retained.
• Pharmacy network and access requirements. The five states also enacted
l
aws regarding pharmacy networks and patient access. Examples include
l
aws prohibiting discrimination against unaffiliated pharmacies and limiting
patient co-pays charged by PBMs.
The regulators GAO interviewed from selected states described lessons learned 
regarding PBM regulation. Examples include the following. 
• Regulators in four states said that providing regulators with broad regulatory
authority was more effective than enacting specific statutory provisions.
Doing so allowed regulators to address emerging issues without new
legislation, according to regulators from one state.
• Some regulators also stressed the need for robust enforcement of PBM laws
and effective penalties to enforce them. Two pharmacy associations GAO
interviewed concurred with these views, while a health plan association said
t
hat monitoring is needed to ensure compliance with PBM requirements.
Three regulators also said that clear reporting requirements and definitions
helped ensure consistent enforcement.
The Department of Labor provided technical comments on a draft copy of this 
report, which GAO incorporated as appropriate. 
Highlights of GAO-24-106898, a report to 
congressional requesters 
Why GAO Did This Study 
Prescription drug spending by private 
health plans climbed to nearly $152 
billion in 2021, an 18 percent increase 
from 2016. Health plans generally rely 
on PBMs to process claims, develop 
pharmacy networks, and negotiate 
rebates from drug manufacturers. 
However, some researchers and 
stakeholders have questioned certain 
PBM practices, such as PBMs 
retaining a share of the rebates and 
use of spread pricing. In response, 
states have begun to enact legislation 
addressing PBMs, with all 50 states 
having enacted at least one PBM-
related law between 2017 and 2023. 
GAO was asked to review states’ 
regulation of PBMs serving private 
health plans. Among other things, this 
report describes actions selected 
states have taken to regulate PBMs, 
and lessons learned that state 
regulators identified for PBM 
regulation.  
GAO focused on a selection of five 
states that have enacted a wide range 
of PBM laws, based on existing 
inventories maintained by national 
policy research organizations, such as 
the National Conference of State 
Legislatures. GAO reviewed states’ 
laws and interviewed state regulators 
as well as a variety of other 
stakeholders. These included state 
pharmacy associations and state 
health plan associations in each of the 
five states, and four national 
organizations representing interests of 
PBMs, patients, employers, and drug 
manufacturers, respectively. 
View GAO-24-106898. For more information, 
contact John E. Dicken at (202) 512- 7114 or 
dickenj@gao.gov. 
===PAGE 3===
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page i GAO-24-106898  Prescription Drugs 
Letter  1 
Background 4 
States We Reviewed Have Enacted a Variety of Laws to Regulate 
PBMs 10 
Stakeholders Expressed Mixed Views on Selected State Actions 
to Regulate PBMs 17 
State Regulators Identified Lessons Such as Providing Broad 
State Regulatory Authority and Robust Enforcement Powers 22 
Agency Comments 26 
Appendix I Stakeholders Interviewed by GAO 28 
 
Appendix II Stakeholders Views on Areas of State Pharmacy Benefit Manager  
(PBM) Regulation in Five Selected States 29 
 
Appendix III GAO Contact and Staff Acknowledgments 34 
 
Tables 
Table 1: Selected State-Level Actions to Regulate Pharmacy 
Benefit Managers (PBMs) Serving Private, Employer-
Sponsored Health Plans, as of November 2023 16 
Table 2: Stakeholder Positions on Areas of Pharmacy Benefit 
Manager (PBM) Regulation 20 
Table 3: Examples of Comments Offered by Stakeholders 
Regarding Areas of State Pharmacy Benefit Manager 
(PBM) Regulation 21 
 
Figure 
Figure 1: Example of the Flow of Funds and Prescription Drugs 
through the Supply Chain When a Health Plan Member 
Purchases a Drug through a Pharmacy Benefit Manager 
(PBM) 9 
 
 
 
 
Contents 
===PAGE 4===
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page ii GAO-24-106898  Prescription Drugs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abbreviations 
 
ERISA  Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 
MAC  maximum allowable cost 
PBM  pharmacy benefit manager 
 
 
This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the 
United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety 
without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain 
copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be 
necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. 
===PAGE 5===
 
 
Page 1 GAO-24-106898  Prescription Drugs 
441 G St. N.W. 
Washington, DC 20548 
March 18, 2024 
The Honorable Virginia Foxx 
Chairwoman 
Committee on Education and the Workforce 
House of Representatives 
The Honorable Bob Good 
Chairman 
Subcommittee on Health, Employment, Labor, and Pensions 
Committee on Education and the Workforce 
House of Representatives 
The H
onorable Rick Allen 
House of Representatives 
The H
onorable Diana Harshbarger 
House of Representatives 
Retail prescription drug spending by private health plans in the U.S. 
totaled nearly $152 billion in 2021—almost 13 percent of total private 
health care spending and an almost 18 percent increase over 2016.1 To 
help manage rising prescription drug costs, private health plans generally 
contract with pharmacy benefit managers (PBM) to administer their 
pharmacy benefits. PBMs may negotiate prices or rebates with drug 
manufacturers, develop networks of pharmacies and negotiate prices 
paid to pharmacies for dispensing drugs to plan enrollees, and adjudicate 
claims. 
Researchers and various stakeholders have noted advantages of, but 
have also raised questions about, the services that pharmacy benefit 
managers provide.
2 Some health plans and the PBM trade association 
1Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, Office of the Actuary, National Health 
Statistics Group, Table 16: Retail Prescription Drugs Expenditures; Levels, Percent 
Change, and Percent Distribution, by Source of Funds: Selected Calendar Years 1970-
2021 (Baltimore, MD.: 2022). This figure does not include out-of-pocket expenses (i.e., 
expenditures not covered by insurance) or non-retail prescriptions (e.g., those dispensed 
in hospitals or physicians’ offices). 
2See, for example, T. Joseph Mattingly, David A. Hyman and Ge Bai, “Pharmacy Benefit 
Managers: History, Business Practice, Economics, and Policy,” JAMA Health Forum, vol. 
4, no. 11 (2023). 
Letter 
===PAGE 6===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 2 GAO-24-106898  Prescription Drugs 
have generally noted that PBMs’ market power enables them to directly 
negotiate rebates with manufacturers to lower prescription drug costs for 
enrollees and health plans. They also highlight the other functions that 
PBMs provide, such as promoting generic substitution, improving 
patients’ drug adherence, and identifying possible adverse drug reactions. 
However, an employer organization, a pharmacy association, and a 
patient advocacy organization have raised questions about whether 
pharmacy benefit managers have too much market power, and whether 
PBM arrangements are too complex and opaque, making it difficult to 
identify all their sources of revenue. For example, PBMs may derive their 
revenue from various sources including retention of some manufacturer 
rebates, administrative fees charged to health plans, and the spread 
between what they pay pharmacies to dispense drugs and what they 
charge health plans. According to the Commonwealth Fund, some of 
these revenue sources are generally kept confidential even from the 
health plans that hire the PBMs. 
Trends in the industry have also raised concerns about the market power 
of pharmacy benefit managers. Consolidation among PBMs has resulted 
in the three largest PBMs processing approximately 79 percent of all 
prescription drugs in 2022.3 Another trend which also increases PBM 
market power is their vertical integration with other entities. The Federal 
Trade Commission announced an inquiry in 2022, which is ongoing as of 
January 2024, intended to assess the effect of vertical integration on the 
access to and affordability of prescription drugs, noting that the three 
largest PBMs are each integrated with both a health insurer and wholly 
owned mail order and specialty pharmacies.
4 
States, as the primary regulators of private health insurance, have taken 
actions to regulate PBMs to lower prescription drug costs and address 
some of their concerns about PBM business practices. You asked us to 
review states’ actions to regulate PBMs serving private health plans. In 
this report we describe: 
1. actions selected states have taken to regulate PBMs, 
 
3Additionally, the six largest PBMs control 96 percent of the market, according to one 
source. See Drug Channels Institute, The Top Pharmacy Benefit Managers of 2022: 
Market Share and Trends for the Biggest Companies (Philadelphia, PA: 2023). 
4Federal Trade Commission, “FTC Launches Inquiry Into Prescription Drug Middlemen 
Industry” (June 7, 2022), accessed March 15, 2023, 
https://www.ftc.gov/news-events/news/press-releases/2022/06/ftc-launches-inquiry-prescri
ption-drug-middlemen-industry. 
===PAGE 7===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 3 GAO-24-106898  Prescription Drugs 
2. selected stakeholders’ views of these actions, and 
3. lessons for PBM regulation identified by state regulators. 
For all three objectives, we focused on a nongeneralizable selection of 
five states with experience implementing state laws affecting PBM 
business practices. To select states, we first reviewed existing inventories 
of state PBM laws maintained by three national policy research 
organizations to identify states that had enacted a wide range of PBM 
laws.5 We also considered geographic diversity to the extent possible. 
Based on these criteria we selected five states: Arkansas, California, 
Louisiana, Maine, and New York. 
To describe actions that the five selected states have taken to regulate 
PBMs, we reviewed state laws and related documents. We also 
interviewed state regulators from the primary oversight agency (e.g., state 
departments of insurance) to discuss the PBM laws passed by their 
legislatures and the implementation of these laws. 
To describe stakeholder views of states’ actions to regulate PBMs and 
any lessons learned from stakeholders about PBM regulation, we 
interviewed the state health plan association and state pharmacy 
association in each selected state, in addition to the state regulators.
6 To 
augment these perspectives, we also interviewed four national 
organizations, including the trade association representing PBMs and 
three national advocacy organizations representing employers’ interests, 
patient interests, and pharmaceutical manufacturers. See appendix I for a 
list of the stakeholders we interviewed. 
We conducted this performance audit from June 2023 through March 
2024 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing 
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to 
 
5The three organizations were National Academy for State Health Policy, National 
Conference of State Legislators, and National Association of Insurance Commissioners. 
Compendia of state laws are available on the organizations’ websites at 
https://nashp.org/state-drug-pricing-laws-2017-2023, 
https://www.ncsl.org/health/prescription-drug-state-bill-tracking-database-2015-present, 
and https://content.naic.org/cipr-topics/pharmacy-benefit-managers, respectively 
(accessed December 4, 2023). 
6In one state where there was no health plan association, we instead interviewed the 
state’s largest insurer that covered 86 percent of individuals in the state in 2022. For 
simplicity, in some cases we use the term health plan association for this insurer in the 
report. 
===PAGE 8===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 4 GAO-24-106898  Prescription Drugs 
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for 
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe 
that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our finding 
and conclusions based on our audit objectives. 
 
Nearly half of the population in the U.S.—about 158 million individuals—
receives health coverage through private health plans sponsored by their 
employers.
7 Generally, employers provide health coverage in two ways. 
They may purchase coverage from state-regulated issuers on behalf of 
their employees (also known as fully insured plans). Alternately, they can 
self-fund their plans (also known as self-insured plans)—that is, they pay 
directly for at least some of their employees’ health care costs and 
typically contract with an issuer or other company to administer benefits 
and process claims. In 2022, about 65 percent of covered employees 
were in self-insured plans.8 
Both states and the federal government have regulatory roles in private 
health coverage. The federal government, led by the Department of 
Labor, regulates private employer-sponsored health plans under the 
Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA), which sets 
minimum standards for group health plans, both fully insured and self-
insured. Among these standards are claims and appeals processes, 
reporting and disclosure requirements, and fiduciary responsibilities for 
those who administer the plan and its assets.
9 
 
7Kaiser Family Foundation, Health Insurance Coverage of the Total Population, 2022 (San 
Francisco, CA: 2023). In addition, about another 20 million individuals purchased health 
coverage through private health plans as individuals, outside of the workplace. These 
estimates are based on the 2008-2022 American Community Survey. 
In general, those who obtain private health coverage do so in the individual or group 
market. The individual market includes plans purchased directly from an insurer, while the 
group market—which includes small and large groups—is largely made up of employer-
sponsored plans. 
8See Kaiser Family Foundation, Employer Health Benefits 2022 Annual Survey (San 
Francisco, CA: October 2022). 
9A fiduciary is required to act in the best interest of the entity (e.g., health plan) to which 
the duty is owed. ERISA requires fiduciaries to act prudently and solely in the interest of 
health plan participants and beneficiaries. Group health plans are also subject to certain 
health care reforms and consumer protections, including those added by the Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act, No Surprises Act, and Mental Health Parity and 
Addiction Equity Act of 2008. 
Background 
Overview of Private, 
Employer-Sponsored 
Health Coverage 
Regulation of Private, 
Employer Sponsored 
Health Coverage and 
PBMs 
===PAGE 9===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 5 GAO-24-106898  Prescription Drugs 
States are the primary regulators of health insurance issuers. Health 
plans offered by state regulated issuers, including fully insured plans, are 
subject to both state and federal requirements.10 Each state’s insurance 
department enforces the states’ insurance laws and regulations. State 
insurance departments typically manage the licensing of issuers and 
agents selling insurance products. Additionally, states regulate issuers’ 
financial operations to ensure funds are adequate to pay claims, review 
premium rates, and implement consumer protections such as claims 
appeals processes. 
ERISA preempts state laws that “relate to” any employee benefit plan and 
has been interpreted by courts to restrict the extent to which states can 
regulate self-insured plans.
11 For example, self-insured plans are not 
required to comply with state-mandated benefit requirements, such as 
coverage of certain benefits or procedures. Therefore, an advantage of 
self-insured plans to large, multi-state employers is the ability to offer a 
uniform benefit package across different locations, as long as it complies 
with ERISA requirements. While ERISA generally limits states’ ability to 
regulate self-insured plans, the Supreme Court has ruled that states may 
impose certain regulatory requirements that do not have an impermissible 
connection or impermissible reference to an ERISA plan.
12 PBM 
advocates have claimed that certain state laws regulating PBM practices 
are preempted by ERISA, in part because the laws have a direct 
regulatory effect on how ERISA-governed plans manage drug benefits.13 
As the role of PBMs has grown from that of processing claims to a larger 
role in fully administering drug benefits and negotiating prices along the 
pharmaceutical supply chain, states have begun to regulate PBMs. 
According to a few stakeholders, states have taken different approaches 
to regulating PBMs as, among other factors, oversight and enforcement 
 
10Issuers are entities licensed by a state to engage in the business of health insurance in 
that specific state.  
11Under ERISA, states retain the authority to regulate issuers. Therefore, a fully insured 
health plan, where an employer purchases health coverage from an issuer, is regulated by 
state insurance laws (through state regulation of the issuer) and ERISA (through federal 
regulation of the plan). 
12See, for example, Gobeille v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co., 577 U. S. 312 (2016); New York 
State Conference of Blue Cross & Blue Shield Plans v. Travelers Ins. Co., 514 U. S. 645 
(1995). More recently, the Supreme Court held that ERISA does not preempt an Arkansas 
law regulating PBM reimbursement to pharmacies. Rutledge v. Pharm. Care Mgmt. 
Assoc., 141 S. Ct. 474 (2020). 
13See Pharm. Care Mgmt. Assoc. v. Mulready, No. 22-6074 (10th Cir. 2023). 
===PAGE 10===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 6 GAO-24-106898  Prescription Drugs 
authority may be divided among different departments or laws within a 
state. For example, a state’s insurance department may license PBMs as 
third-party administrators under its insurance law; PBM duties of care 
may be specified under its public health and safety law; and enforcement 
authority may rest with a different entity, such as the Attorney General’s 
office. According to one group tracking PBM legislation at the state level, 
between 2017 and 2023, all 50 states had enacted at least one law 
regulating PBM business practices. These laws have included licensure 
and registration requirements, mandated transparency reporting, and 
requirements regarding consumer protections and pharmacy 
reimbursement.
14 
Prescription drug spending has consistently grown over the past decade, 
prompting health plans to seek ways to better manage these costs. Retail 
prescription drug expenditures by private health plans grew from $129.1 
billion to nearly $152 billion between 2016 and 2021, an increase of 
approximately 18 percent.15 
The main driver of that growth is increased prescription drug prices, as 
opposed to increased prescription drug utilization (i.e., the number of 
prescriptions filled). While retail prescription drug spending grew by 13 
percent between 2016 and 2021, retail prescription drug utilization only 
increased by 5.7 percent in this same period. The increase in spending is 
driven in part by growing spending on high-cost prescription drugs known 
as specialty drugs.
16 In 2021, specialty drugs comprised 15.4 percent of 
retail prescriptions but represented 41.8 percent of retail prescription 
spending. Additionally, retail specialty drug prescriptions declined by 18.3 
percent between 2016 and 2021, while retail spending on specialty drugs 
increased by 21.9 percent in the same period. 
 
14National Academy for State Health Policy, “State Tracker: State Pharmacy Benefit 
Manager Legislation, 2017-2023” (Washington, DC: November 2023), accessed 
November 3, 2023, https://nashp.org/state-pharmacy-benefit-manager-legislation. 
15Department of Health and Human Services, Assistant Secretary for Planning and 
Evaluation (ASPE), Office of Science & Data Policy. Trends in Prescription Drug 
Spending, 2016-2021 (Washington, DC: 2022). 
Retail drugs are defined as those filled in an outpatient setting such as standalone 
pharmacies or mail order prescriptions. Non-retail drugs are those administered in an 
inpatient setting such as a hospital, clinic, or physician office.  
16The data used by ASPE defines specialty drugs as generally high-cost products used to 
treat complex, rare, or chronic disease. See Department of Health and Human Services, 
Trends in Prescription Drug Spending, 2016-2021. 
Overview of Prescription 
Drug Spending Trends 
===PAGE 11===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 7 GAO-24-106898  Prescription Drugs 
Many health plans contract with PBMs to manage prescription drug 
benefits. The Pharmaceutical Care Management Association (PCMA), a 
PBM trade association, reports that more than 275 million Americans 
receive prescription drug benefits through PBMs across several insurance 
markets including employer-sponsored plans, Medicaid, and Medicare 
Part D. There are over 60 PBMs in the United States, but a large majority 
of prescription drug claims are processed by just three: CVS 
Health/Caremark, Cigna/Evernorth/Express Scripts, and United 
Health/OptumRx. 
Pharmacy benefit managers offer services that reduce the complexity of 
administering prescription drug benefits and negotiate rebates with 
manufacturers to reduce the overall cost of prescription drugs. PBMs 
generally handle rebate negotiations, claims processing, and payments at 
various points within the pharmaceutical drug supply chain (see fig. 1). 
Additionally, some PBMs have a direct role in the physical distribution of 
prescription drugs.
17 
Pharmacy benefit managers receive compensation from health plans for 
their services in a variety of ways. Health plans may opt for an 
administrative fee contract, where they pay the PBM directly for all the 
services provided. Alternatively, health plans may elect to use a spread 
pricing option. Under spread pricing, the health plan pays the PBM a set 
price for each prescription filled, and the PBM retains the difference 
between the price paid by the health plan and the price paid to the 
pharmacy as a form of compensation. Additionally, PBMs may retain a 
portion of manufacturer rebates to offset the fees health plans would 
otherwise pay. 
PBMs provide the following services within the pharmaceutical supply 
chain. 
• Rebate negotiation and formulary development. The number of 
covered individuals receiving prescription drug benefits through PBMs 
gives PBMs power to negotiate with pharmaceutical manufacturers. 
PBMs use this to negotiate rebates with pharmaceutical 
manufacturers—generally for brand-name and specialty drugs—in 
exchange for placement on health plans’ formularies. Rebates are 
 
17While PBMs generally do not have a direct role in the physical distribution of prescription 
drugs, some PBMs operate mail order pharmacies or specialty drug facilities to fill 
prescriptions. The largest PBMs are fully vertically integrated with the largest health 
insurers and wholly owned mail order and specialty pharmacies. 
Private Health Plans’ Use 
of PBMs 
===PAGE 12===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 8 GAO-24-106898  Prescription Drugs 
applied after sales, and PBMs may pass some of these rebates on to 
health plans to reduce premiums for plan beneficiaries. 
• Pharmacy network development. PBMs negotiate drug prices and 
reimbursements with pharmacies to create networks where plan 
members can fill prescriptions. Enrollees have incentives to use in-
network pharmacies as they typically offer lower out-of-pocket costs 
compared to out-of-network pharmacies. 
• Utilization management. PBMs assist health plans in administering 
and monitoring patient drug utilization. This includes actions such as 
step therapy, a requirement where patients must first try less 
expensive alternatives before moving onto a more expensive drug 
their physician initially prescribed. Another example is prior 
authorization, where patients must receive approval before obtaining 
a particular drug. 
• Claims processing. PBMs process claims filed by pharmacies and 
adjudicate claims on behalf of health plans. 
===PAGE 13===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 9 GAO-24-106898  Prescription Drugs 
Figure 1: Example of the Flow of Funds and Prescription Drugs through the Supply Chain When a Health Plan Member 
Purchases a Drug through a Pharmacy Benefit Manager (PBM) 
 
 
According to a few stakeholders, health plans generally include a “duty of 
care” provision or clause in their contracts with pharmacy benefit 
managers, which typically require PBMs to perform their specified duties 
with good faith and in accordance with the terms of their contract. 
According to one state regulatory agency, health plans may terminate 
their PBM contracts if the PBM breaches this duty. However, some states 
have imposed additional duties of care on PBMs beyond those specified 
in their contracts with health plans. One type of duty of care is a fiduciary 
Duty of Care Provisions 
and Fiduciary Duty 
===PAGE 14===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 10 GAO-24-106898  Prescription Drugs 
duty, which requires PBMs to act in the best interests, and protect the 
financial interests, of the party to which they owe the duty, such as their 
health plan clients. Fiduciaries may be held liable for restoring losses to 
the plan or returning profits gained through improper use of plan assets. 
The five selected states enacted a wide range of laws to regulate PBMs, 
including imposing duty of care requirements and other policies related to 
drug pricing and pharmacy reimbursement, transparency reporting, and 
enrollee access to pharmacy networks. These laws apply to PBMs 
serving fully insured plans, and, depending on the state and type of law, 
may also apply to PBMs serving self-insured plans.
18 
Four of the five selected states imposed a duty of care on PBMs to the 
health plans for which they administered pharmacy benefits. 
• Maine. Maine’s law states that PBMs are agents of, and owe a 
fiduciary duty to, the health plans with which they contract.19 Plans are 
responsible for ensuring PBMs comply with these and other contract 
terms.20 
• California, New York, and Louisiana. Laws in California, Louisiana, 
and New York impose some version of a duty of good faith on PBMs. 
California requires PBMs to exercise “good faith and fair dealing.”
21 
New York requires PBMs to act with “care, skill, prudence, diligence, 
and professionalism” and imposes a duty of good faith and fair dealing 
to all parties with whom they interact in the performance of PBM 
services.
22 Louisiana establishes “the duties of good faith, honesty, 
 
18Arkansas officials told us that, except for the Maximum Allowable Cost (MAC) list 
provision, they do not enforce PBM laws against pharmacy benefit managers that only 
serve self-insured plans. California officials told us that their PBM laws do not apply to 
pharmacy benefit managers serving self-insured plans. Louisiana officials told us that their 
PBM laws do not specifically address self-insured plans. Maine officials told us the only 
PBM laws that apply to pharmacy benefit managers serving self-insured plans are the 
licensing and reporting requirements. New York officials told us their PBM laws apply to all 
pharmacy benefit managers regardless of the type of plan they serve. 
In some states, these laws may also apply to PBMs serving other plans such as Medicaid, 
which are beyond the scope of this report. 
1924-A M.R.S. § 4349(2). 
2024-A M.R.S. § 4349(1)-(2). 
21CA Bus. & Prof. Code § 4441(c). 
22N.Y. Pub. Health Law § 280-a(2). 
States We Reviewed 
Have Enacted a 
Variety of Laws to 
Regulate PBMs 
Four of Five Selected 
States Imposed a Duty of 
Care on PBMs, but States 
Took Different Approaches 
===PAGE 15===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 11 GAO-24-106898  Prescription Drugs 
trust, confidence, and candor” for PBMs.23 Laws in two states—
Louisiana and New York—specify that the PBMs’ duty of care is to 
both health plans and enrollees. 
• Arkansas. This state does not impose a specific duty of care on 
PBMs. State regulators told us that, after a bill that included a 
fiduciary requirement failed to pass, legislators thought existing state 
PBM regulations were sufficient, and an additional duty of care 
standard was not required. 
The five selected states have taken a range of other actions to regulate 
PBMs. Three states—Arkansas, Louisiana, and Maine—have 
implemented several provisions relating to drug pricing and pharmacy 
reimbursement. California regulators told us that their legislature has 
generally not enacted PBM-related legislation regarding drug pricing and 
reimbursement that would affect health plans under their purview, with the 
exception of a maximum allowable cost (MAC) law.
24 New York officials 
told us that state regulators are in the process of promulgating regulations 
to implement recently enacted PBM legislation. However, all five states 
have imposed licensure, registration (including transparency and/or 
reporting), or access requirements for PBMs. 
Drug pricing and pharmacy reimbursement requirements. Four of the 
five states have implemented provisions governing PBMs’ usage of 
rebates, spread pricing, retroactive payment adjustments to pharmacies, 
reimbursement of pharmacies, or MAC lists. 
• Rebate usage. Two of the five states regulate PBMs’ use of 
manufacturer rebates. Maine requires that PBMs either remit all 
rebates to enrollees at the point of sale or remit them to the issuer, in 
which case the issuer is required to use those funds to reduce 
premiums or out-of-pocket costs for enrollees.25 Arkansas requires 
 
23LA Rev. Stat. § 40:2864. 
24According to California regulators, the primary law governing state oversight of managed 
health care provides the department authority to oversee health plans in the state, 
including contractual relationships with PBMs, but the law does not establish direct 
oversight over PBMs. A stakeholder told us there are forty-four plans in California under 
the purview of the Department of Managed Health Care, representing primarily health 
maintenance organizations but also some traditional insurers. Roughly three to five 
percent of other health plans, primarily traditional insurers, are governed by the California 
Department of Insurance. 
2524-A M.R.S. § 4350-A. 
Selected States’ 
Requirements for PBMs 
on Drug Pricing and 
Pharmacy 
Reimbursement, 
Transparency, and Access 
===PAGE 16===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 12 GAO-24-106898  Prescription Drugs 
that PBMs and health plans set enrollee cost-sharing amounts for 
prescription drugs based on post-rebate prices.26 
• Spread pricing. Two of the five states enacted legislation addressing 
PBMs’ use of spread pricing—a practice in which PBMs reimburse 
pharmacies at one rate and charge plans a different rate, retaining 
any positive difference as revenues.
27 Arkansas prohibits spread 
pricing, while Louisiana prohibits spread pricing unless a PBM 
provides a written notice at least biannually to policyholders indicating 
the aggregate spread pricing amounts charged by the PBM in that 
period.
28 
• Retroactive payment adjustments. Three of the five states regulate 
PBMs’ ability to retroactively reduce or deny payments to pharmacies. 
For example, Maine and Arkansas prohibit retroactive payment 
reductions except in cases of fraud or error.29 
• Pharmacy reimbursement rates. Three of the five states regulate 
PBMs’ reimbursement of pharmacies. Arkansas and Louisiana 
prohibit pharmacy benefit managers from reimbursing a pharmacy not 
owned or affiliated with a PBM less for a pharmacy service, such as 
filling a prescription, than the PBM would reimburse a PBM-owned or 
affiliated pharmacy for the same pharmacy service.
30 Both states also 
permit pharmacies to decline to fill a prescription if the pharmacy 
benefit manager would pay less than the pharmacy acquisition cost.
31 
Maine requires PBMs to reimburse pharmacies at ingredient cost plus 
a dispensing fee, minus any enrollee cost-sharing.
32 
• Maximum allowable costs (MAC) lists. Four states regulate how 
PBMs use or construct their MAC lists in some way. MAC lists specify 
the maximum amounts PBMs will reimburse pharmacies for generic 
 
26Ark. Code § 23-79-2503. 
27In addition, while Maine has not enacted legislation regulating spread pricing, Maine 
officials told us that their regulations require PBMs to remit the proceeds of spread pricing 
to the enrollee or issuer in the same manner as rebates. Officials in New York told us that 
health maintenance organizations are required to include in their contracts with PBMs a 
prohibition on spread pricing. 
28Ark. Code § 23-92-505(c); LA Rev. Stat. § 22:1867. 
2924-A M.R.S. § 4350(8)(D); Ark. Code § 23-92-506(c).  
30Ark. Code § 23-92-506(b)(4)(A); LA Rev. Stat. § 40:2870(A)(8). 
31Ark. Code § 17-92-507(e); LA Rev. Stat. § 22:1860.3(B)(1). 
3224-A M.R.S. § 4350(8)(A). 
===PAGE 17===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 13 GAO-24-106898  Prescription Drugs 
drugs and branded drugs with generic competition. Maine requires 
PBMs to use the same MAC list for all pharmacies.33 Louisiana 
requires PBMs to make available to pharmacies a comprehensive list 
of drugs subject to their MAC lists and the sources used to obtain 
drug price data.34 Louisiana, Arkansas, Maine, and California have 
established criteria for drugs’ inclusion on a MAC list.35 
Transparency. To increase the transparency of PBMs’ operations, all five 
selected states require PBMs to be licensed by or registered with the 
state, or both, and to provide certain information, such as rebates and 
fees, to the state or to the health plans with which they contract. 
• Licensure and registration. All five states require PBMs to obtain a 
license to operate or register with the state, or both. State licensing 
and registration requirements may either be separate from reporting 
requirements or linked to each other. For example, in California, 
PBMs are required to register with the Department of Managed Health 
Care and must provide quarterly reports to health plans regarding 
rebates, fees, and other payments.36 In Louisiana, PBMs must submit 
an annual transparency report to the Louisiana Department of 
Insurance to maintain their license.37 
• Transparency reporting. Laws in the selected states vary in how 
often and to whom they require PBMs to submit data. Maine requires 
PBMs to annually disclose drug pricing data to the state.38 Arkansas 
operates on a system in which the Insurance Commissioner initiates 
PBM audits as necessary and requires PBMs to comply upon 
request.
39 Louisiana requires PBMs to report to the Louisiana 
Department of Insurance aggregate rebates from manufacturers, the 
aggregate percentage of those rebates that PBMs retain, and 
 
3324-A M.R.S. § 4350(1). 
34LA Rev. Stat. § 22:1864(A)(4). 
35LA Rev. Stat. § 22:1864(A); Ark. Code § 17-92-507(b); CA Bus. & Prof. Code § 4440(d); 
24-A M.R.S. § 4350(2). 
36CA Health & Safety Code § 1385.005; CA Bus. & Prof. Code § 4441(e). 
37LA Rev. Stat. § 22:1657.1(A). 
3822 M.R.S. § 8732. 
39Ark. Code § 23-92-505(b). 
===PAGE 18===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 14 GAO-24-106898  Prescription Drugs 
aggregate administrative fees received.40 New York requires annual 
reporting by PBMs of rebates and other information to both the state 
and the health plans.41 California requires PBMs to report quarterly on 
rebates and other information to the health plans with which they 
contract upon those plans’ request.42 
Networks and access. All five selected states enacted legislation to 
expand patient access to affordable drugs, such as the following. 
• Pharmacy networks. Two of the five selected states have laws that 
regulate PBMs’ pharmacy network design or prohibit discrimination 
against unaffiliated pharmacies.
43 Arkansas requires that the nearest 
in-person pharmacy in a PBM’s network be within a reasonable 
distance from an enrollee’s home.44 Arkansas also restricts PBMs 
from imposing more stringent certification standards on pharmacies in 
its network than those imposed by the state board without review and 
approval by the insurance commissioner in coordination with the state 
board of pharmacy.45 Louisiana prohibits PBMs from “steering” 
enrollees to pharmacies in which the PBM has an ownership interest, 
unless they provide a written disclosure and receive 
acknowledgement from enrollees.46 
• Limits on enrollee co-pays. Three of the five selected states limit 
enrollee co-pays charged by PBMs.47 Maine requires PBMs to cap 
point-of-sale costs for enrollees at the least of three amounts: the 
enrollee’s cost-sharing amount, the price of the drug without any drug 
benefits or discounts, or the total amount the pharmacy will be 
 
40LA Rev. Stat. § 22:1657.1. 
41N.Y. Pub. Health Law § 280-a(2)(c); N.Y. Ins. Law § 2904  
42CA Bus. & Prof. Code § 4441(e). 
43In addition, laws in Maine and California regulate issuers’ or health plans’ pharmacy 
networks but do not apply directly to PBMs. Maine has also promulgated a regulation 
requiring PBMs to demonstrate that their pharmacy network will be adequate for patients. 
44Ark. Code §§ 23-92-505(a)(1), 23-92-509(b)(2)(B). 
45Ark. Code § 23-92-506(b)(3). 
46LA. Rev. Stat. § 40:2870(A)(5)(a). 
47In addition, California law requires health plans to cap costs for patients at the lesser of 
the patient’s co-pay or the retail price of the drug; however, this law applies to health 
plans. 
===PAGE 19===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 15 GAO-24-106898  Prescription Drugs 
reimbursed.48 New York prohibits PBMs from collecting co-pays from 
enrollees greater than the charges submitted by the pharmacy.49 
Arkansas prohibits charging an enrollee more for drugs than the 
amount retained by the pharmacy from all payment sources.50 
• Price disclosure to enrollees. The five states have taken action to 
ensure that pharmacies are not prohibited in their contracts from 
informing enrollees when a less costly alternative to paying for a 
prescription through their insurance is available. 
• Utilization management. Only one state regulates PBMs’ use of step 
therapy, in which patients must try a less expensive drug before the 
PBM will authorize use of a more expensive drug.
51 Specifically, 
Louisiana prohibits PBMs from requiring step therapy if the prescribed 
drug is already on the health plan’s formulary, the beneficiary 
previously tried the prescribed drug, and the provider submits a 
justification and supporting clinical documentation.
52 
Table 1 below provides a summary of the laws the selected states have 
enacted to regulate PBMs. 
  
 
4824-A M.R.S. § 4349(4). 
49N.Y. Pub. Health Law § 280-a(5)(b). 
50Ark. Code § 4-88-1004. 
51Arkansas regulates issuers’ use of step therapy, but it does not directly regulate PBMs’ 
use of step therapy. 
52LA. Rev. Stat. § 40:2870(A)(15). 
===PAGE 20===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 16 GAO-24-106898  Prescription Drugs 
Table 1: Selected State-Level Actions to Regulate Pharmacy Benefit Managers (PBMs) Serving Private, Employer-Sponsored 
Health Plans, as of November 2023 
State action  Arkansasa Californiab Louisianac Mained New Yorke 
Imposes a duty of care on PBMs, generally to health 
plans 
     
 Fiduciary duty n/a n/a n/a  n/a 
 Good faith n/a   n/a  
Drug pricing and pharmacy reimbursement 
     
 Regulates PBMs’ use of manufacturer rebates   n/a n/a  n/a 
 Regulates PBMs’ use of spread pricingf   n/a  n/a n/a 
 Regulates PBMs’ ability to retroactively adjust pharmacy 
payments 
 n/a   n/a 
 Requires PBMs to reimburse pharmacies at minimum 
thresholds  
 n/a   n/a 
 Regulates how PBMs use or construct Maximum 
Allowable Costs (MAC) lists 
    n/a 
 Allows pharmacies to refuse to fill prescriptions 
reimbursed below their acquisition costs 
 n/a  n/a n/a 
Transparency  
     
 Requires PBMs to be licensed by or registered (or both) 
with the state 
     
 Requires PBMs to provide certain information to the state 
or health plans, such as rebates, fees, and other 
payments 
     
Networks and access 
     
 Regulates some element of PBMs’ pharmacy network 
design 
 n/a  n/a n/a 
 Limits on PBMs’ enrollee co-pays   n/a n/a   
 Allows pharmacies to inform patients of lower prices for 
their prescription drugs 
     
 Utilization management n/a n/a  n/a n/a 
Legend:  = State has enacted legislation, n/a = State has not enacted legislation. 
Source: GAO analysis of state laws.  |  GAO-24-106898 
Note: In addition to these laws that directly regulate PBMs, selected states may regulate the 
prescription drug benefits offered by health plans. To the extent health plans contract with PBMs to 
deliver such prescription drug benefits, PBMs may also be required to adhere to those requirements. 
However, laws regulating health plans’ prescription drugs benefits are beyond the scope of this 
report. 
aArkansas officials told us that except for the MAC list provision, they do not enforce PBM laws 
against PBMs that only serve self-insured plans. 
bCalifornia officials told us their PBM laws do not apply to PBMs serving self-insured plans. 
cLouisiana officials told us their PBM laws do not specifically address self-insured plans. 
dMaine officials told us the only PBM laws that apply to PBMs serving self-insured plans are the 
licensing and reporting requirements. 
===PAGE 21===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 17 GAO-24-106898  Prescription Drugs 
eNew York officials told us their PBM laws apply to all PBMs, regardless of the type of plan they 
serve. 
fSpread pricing is a practice in which PBMs reimburse pharmacies at one rate and charge plans a 
different rate, retaining any positive difference as revenues. 
 
Stakeholders we interviewed expressed mixed views about the actions 
the five selected states have taken to regulate PBMs. Most 
stakeholders—mainly state regulators, pharmacy associations, and 
national advocacy organizations—supported state efforts to impose a 
duty of care on PBMs, while most health plan associations and the PBM 
trade association generally opposed the imposition of a duty of care on 
PBMs. Additionally, most stakeholders also supported other legislative 
efforts such as increased transparency requirements, regulating rebates, 
and other pricing and reimbursement laws as well as network access 
laws. However, most health plan associations and the PBM trade 
association generally opposed state actions regulating pricing and 
reimbursement and network access. 
Most stakeholders we interviewed told us they believed a duty of care 
requirement was appropriate for PBMs although some stakeholders we 
interviewed disagreed. Regulators from three states, officials from four 
pharmacy associations, and officials from three national advocacy 
organization told us that a duty of care should be imposed on PBMs. 
However, officials from four health plan associations, officials from one 
health plan, and officials from the PBM trade association told us that they 
did not think a duty of care should be imposed. 
Stakeholders expressed varied views on the applicability of, need for, and 
scope of, a fiduciary duty requirement for PBMs, as in the following 
examples. 
• Applicability. Regulators from the one state (Maine) that successfully 
enacted a fiduciary duty law told us that they believed a fiduciary duty 
was applicable to PBMs because PBMs exercise significant 
management and discretion over prescription drug coverage.
53 
However, officials from a PBM trade association told us that plan 
sponsors are the fiduciaries since they are the ones offering and 
designing the benefits; PBMs are simply carrying out their 
 
53A national advocacy organization representing large employers’ health care interests 
similarly stated that a fiduciary duty was relevant to PBMs due to their management over 
prescription drug benefits. 
Stakeholders 
Expressed Mixed 
Views on Selected 
State Actions to 
Regulate PBMs 
Stakeholder Views on a 
Duty of Care Requirement 
for PBMs 
===PAGE 22===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 18 GAO-24-106898  Prescription Drugs 
instructions. They also said that PBMs do not manage plan assets, as 
a fiduciary would. 
• Need. Regulators from three selected states, as well as officials from 
four pharmacy associations and three national advocacy 
organizations, indicated that a fiduciary duty was necessary to ensure 
PBMs act in good faith, while others disagreed. 
• Regulators from two states told us that fiduciary duty laws would 
help remedy concerns they have about certain PBM business 
practices, such as PBMs violating their contracts with pharmacies, 
not notifying pharmacies of reimbursement errors, and improperly 
recouping reimbursements from pharmacies. One pharmacy 
association stated that health plans generally had little interest in 
pushing PBMs to change practices that were harmful to patients, 
and a fiduciary duty would allow patients to take legal action 
against PBMs for engaging in bad faith. Officials from a national 
advocacy organization representing patients stated that a fiduciary 
duty would help ensure that any financial savings that PBMs 
achieve are passed on to the patients. Officials from this 
organization noted that additional vertical consolidation in the 
health care market, such as PBMs owning their own pharmacies, 
creates the need for a fiduciary duty. 
• However, officials from four health plan associations, one health 
plan, and a PBM trade association told us that they did not think a 
duty of care, including a fiduciary duty, needed to be imposed on 
PBMs. An official from a health plan association and one from the 
PBM trade association noted that good faith and fair dealing are 
standard contracting language and are generally already expected 
of PBMs; therefore, additional legislation is not necessary. An 
official from the PBM trade association also stated that imposing a 
fiduciary duty on PBMs could increase prescription drug costs due 
to the increased liability associated with such a duty. 
• Regulators from the four selected states that have not enacted a 
fiduciary duty requirement for PBMs said their states were unable 
to do so due to political opposition from the PBM trade association 
or perceived concerns about ERISA preemption.
54 Due to these 
concerns, regulators from two states and pharmacy association 
officials from two states noted that their respective states settled 
for what they referred to as “lesser” duty of care standards such 
 
54ERISA preemption restricts the extent to which states can regulate covered benefit 
plans, including self-insured health plans and the entities administering those plans, such 
as PBMs, to ensure uniform benefits administration across state lines. 
===PAGE 23===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 19 GAO-24-106898  Prescription Drugs 
as good faith and fair dealing contract requirements. One state 
removed the duty of care provision from proposed legislation 
entirely. 
• Scope. Some stakeholders disagreed on the entities (e.g., health 
plan, enrollee, pharmacy) to which they believed the fiduciary duty 
should be owed. 
• One official from a national advocacy organization representing 
large employers’ healthcare interests stated that the fiduciary duty 
should only be owed to the health plan since PBMs work on behalf 
of the health plan. Officials from one pharmacy association and 
two national advocacy organizations stated that a fiduciary duty 
should be owed by PBMs to pharmacists, health plans, and 
patients. Additionally, an official from a national advocacy 
organization representing pharmaceutical manufacturers stated 
that in the event of a conflict of interest, the fiduciary duty to the 
patient should be prioritized. 
• However, one health plan association official highlighted that 
imposing a fiduciary duty on PBMs could result in a conflict of 
interest between plans and patients. This official stated that if a 
PBM owed a fiduciary duty to both a health plan and its 
beneficiaries, PBMs could face a conflict between what is best for 
individual plan beneficiaries and managing costs for the overall 
plan. For example, an individual plan member may need an 
expensive, off-formulary drug, but this could increase costs for the 
entire health plan. 
Most state regulators, pharmacy associations, and national advocacy 
organizations we interviewed supported state efforts to regulate PBM 
drug pricing and pharmacy reimbursement, increase transparency about 
PBM business practices, and increase access of independent and 
community pharmacies to PBM pharmacy networks. Most health plan 
associations and the PBM trade association we interviewed opposed 
state actions regulating pharmacy reimbursement and network design, 
but some health plan associations supported increasing transparency 
reporting of rebates and other data along the entire pharmaceutical 
supply chain. Table 2 below provides information on whether each of the 
stakeholder groups we met with were generally in favor of or generally 
opposed to actions taken to regulate PBM in the five selected states. 
  
Stakeholder Views on 
PBM Laws Related to 
Pricing, Transparency, and 
Access 
===PAGE 24===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 20 GAO-24-106898  Prescription Drugs 
Table 2: Stakeholder Positions on Areas of Pharmacy Benefit Manager (PBM) Regulation  
 
Generally in favor or opposed 
Area of regulation 
State 
regulators 
Pharmacy 
Associations 
Health Plan 
Associations 
Employer 
Advocacy 
Organization 
Patient 
advocacy 
organization 
PBM trade 
association 
Drug 
manufacturer 
advocacy 
association 
Drug pricing and  
pharmacy reimbursement 
(n=5) (n=5) (n=5) n/a n/a n/a n/a 
 Rebates Yes (3) Yes (4) — Yes Yes — Yes 
 Spread pricing 
prohibitiona 
Yes (3) Yes (5) No (3) Yes — No Yes 
 Retroactive payment 
adjustments 
Yes (2) Yes (3) — — Yes — — 
 Regulation of pharmacy 
reimbursement 
— Yes (5) No (1) — — — — 
 Maximum allowable costs Yes (1) Yes (2) No (1) — — — — 
Transparency  
     
  
  Yes (5) Yes (4) Yes (3) Yes Yes Yes Yes 
Networks and access 
     
  
  Yes (3) Yes (4) No (4) — Yes No Yes 
Legend: — = Stakeholders did not offer a position, n/a = Not applicable because only one such organization was interviewed.  
Source: GAO interviews with selected stakeholders.  |  GAO-24-106898 
Note: Information in the table is based on interviews and correspondence between June and 
November 2023. “Yes” indicates that most of the stakeholder(s) who responded were generally in 
favor, “No” indicates they were generally opposed, and “—” indicates the stakeholder did not offer a 
position. 
aSpread pricing is a practice in which PBMs reimburse pharmacies at one rate and charge plans a 
different rate, retaining any positive difference as revenues. 
  
===PAGE 25===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 21 GAO-24-106898  Prescription Drugs 
Within each of the broad areas of PBM regulation, stakeholders offered 
comments regarding specific topics. See table 3 for a summary of 
comments offered by the stakeholders we interviewed. More detailed 
comments are in appendix II. 
Table 3: Examples of Comments Offered by Stakeholders Regarding Areas of State Pharmacy Benefit Manager (PBM) 
Regulation  
Area of regulation and comments offered to GAO Stakeholder type(s) 
Drug pricing and pharmacy reimbursement  
Rebates  
  Should apply to patients at point of sale Drug manufacturer association 
  Should apply to health plans so all members can benefit from lower 
premiums  
Health plan  
  Should be transparently reported  State regulator, pharmacy association, employer 
advocacy association, patient advocacy 
association, drug manufacturer association 
Spread pricing prohibitiona  
  Bans were necessary due to lack of transparency with spread pricing  Pharmacy association, employer advocacy 
association 
  Had contributed to rising prescription drug costs  State regulator, pharmacy association, employer 
advocacy association 
  Preferred pricing options under spread pricing Health plan association, PBM trade association 
  Spread pricing offered more flexibility for health plans  Health plan association, PBM trade association 
Retroactive payment adjustments (i.e., “clawbacks”)  
  Bans had effectively eliminated clawbacks Pharmacy association 
  Clawbacks were based on arbitrary benchmarks and caused 
pharmacies to lose money on claims 
Pharmacy association 
Regulation of pharmacy reimbursement  
  State’s Medicaid flat fee per prescription payment that is above costs 
should be expanded to private plans  
Pharmacy association 
  Allowing pharmacists to decline prescriptions if payment is below costs 
could restrict patient access  
Health plan association 
Maximum allowable costs (MAC)  
  Has resulted in increased pharmacy reimbursement  Pharmacy association 
  Has allowed pharmacies to successfully challenge inadequate PBM 
reimbursement  
Pharmacy association 
  MAC laws can lead to higher copayment for patients  Health plan association 
Transparency  
  PBM transparency and reporting laws can apply to all types of plans, 
including self-insured plans  
State regulator 
  More detailed reporting of PBM data is required State regulator 
===PAGE 26===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 22 GAO-24-106898  Prescription Drugs 
Area of regulation and comments offered to GAO Stakeholder type(s) 
  Reporting should be required across the entire pharmaceutical supply 
chain, including drug manufacturers 
State regulator, pharmacy association, health plan 
association, patient advocacy association, employer 
advocacy association, PBM trade association 
  Reporting laws can create administrative burdens and increased costs  Health plan association 
Networks and Access  
  Laws ensure that community pharmacies are not excluded from PBM 
networks if they are willing to accept PBM contract terms  
Pharmacy association 
  Laws ensure that independent or community pharmacies are paid the 
same as PBM-owned or affiliated pharmacies  
State regulators, pharmacy association 
  A variety of network and formulary options allow plans flexibility to 
select based on plans’ cost needs  
Health plan association 
  Network adequacy laws hinder PBMs ability to control costs and 
monitor pharmacy quality  
Health plan association 
Source: GAO interviews with selected stakeholders.  |  GAO-24-106898 
Note: Information in the table is based on interviews and correspondence between June and 
November 2023. 
aSpread pricing is a practice in which PBMs reimburse pharmacies at one rate and charge plans a 
different rate, retaining any positive difference as revenues. 
 
The state regulators we interviewed described the lessons they learned 
about regulating PBMs based on their varied perspectives and 
experiences. In some cases, they commented on the factors that either 
contributed to, or hampered, effective regulation and enforcement at the 
state level. Other stakeholders shared concerns about states creating a 
patchwork of laws that undermine large employers’ ability to operate their 
plans under consistent requirements across multiple states. 
Importance of broad regulatory authority. Four of five state regulators 
stated that granting state agencies broad regulatory authority was more 
effective than specific statutory provisions to regulate PBMs. 
Regulators in one state said that the state’s legislature provided them with 
broader authority with respect to PBMs than insurance regulators in most 
states, and that this allows the department to actively address emerging 
concerns related to PBMs. Specifically, state regulators told us that their 
PBM oversight law allows the department of insurance to take regulatory 
action it deems necessary to enforce a range of requirements related to 
market conduct, including network adequacy, pharmacy contracts, 
pharmacy audits, pricing models, and consolidation and integration in the 
PBM industry. As a result, officials said the department does not have to 
rely on specific statutory provisions alone to exercise its authority. The 
officials said that using this regulatory flexibility rather than relying on 
State Regulators 
Identified Lessons 
Such as Providing 
Broad State 
Regulatory Authority 
and Robust 
Enforcement Powers 
===PAGE 27===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 23 GAO-24-106898  Prescription Drugs 
statutes has reduced loopholes and industry influence over policy and 
allowed them to address problematic conduct and issue guidance without 
having to go through the legislative process again. 
Regulators in another state characterized their agency’s regulatory 
authority as among the most comprehensive in the country, although this 
was not always the case. The state originally regulated PBMs as they do 
other third-party administrators. However, the regulators we spoke with 
said that legislation was not sufficient to address PBMs, so the state 
enacted new PBM-specific legislation. They stated that they now rely on a 
combination of statute and agency rulemaking to regulate PBMs. The 
requirements not spelled out in statute were further developed through 
regulation, they said. 
Regulators in a third state said that an important lesson in retrospect was 
the need to expand their general supervisory authority to include not just 
oversight of health plans, but the third-party administrators, like PBMs, 
that serve the plans. They provided examples of areas in which they 
believe more regulation is needed but said that narrow authorizing 
legislation without broad rulemaking authority prevents them from taking 
action. For example, they said that the state’s statutory prohibition on 
spread pricing was not effective because it provided an exception that the 
department said it is unable to address without broader regulatory 
authority.
55 
Robust enforcement. Some state regulators indicated that without 
robust enforcement, state PBM laws may not be effective, a view echoed 
by some of the other stakeholders we interviewed. 
Regulators from the five states noted that they rely on complaints as the 
primary mechanism to ensure PBM compliance with laws and, in some 
states, had taken actions such as audits to address complaints. 
Regulators from three states said they had designated departments to 
investigate complaints. Regulators from one of these states noted that, in 
addition to acting on complaints, they have the authority to promulgate 
regulations to ensure compliance, and the registration and licensure 
process allow them visibility into PBM practices. Regulators from another 
state said they had not taken any enforcement actions to date because 
 
55Specifically, the exception allows PBMs to utilize spread pricing in this state so long as 
they provide a biannual written notice to plan enrollees. 
===PAGE 28===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 24 GAO-24-106898  Prescription Drugs 
the requirements were so new that they had not yet created an 
enforcement structure. 
Other stakeholders also noted factors that hampered or facilitated the 
state’s ability to investigate complaints. A pharmacy association in one 
state claimed that the only way PBM laws can be enforced is if there is a 
sufficiently large volume of complaints that warrants a local district 
attorney or state Attorney General’s time to investigate given their 
workload. The pharmacy association said that, in their state, pharmacists 
must hire an attorney to sue PBMs over violations of the laws, and this is 
often too expensive. On the other hand, a pharmacy association in 
another state noted that having a designated agency to which pharmacies 
can address their complaints was more effective than submitting 
complaints directly to the PBMs. 
Regulators from two states said that two keys to strong enforcement are 
substantial penalties and sufficient resources. The regulators explained 
that if PBMs do not face large financial disincentives, they may see 
paying minor fees as a cost of doing business. For example, one state 
regulator said they had imposed a $4,000 per day penalty for every day of 
late filing of a required report after PBMs were opting to pay the previous 
one-time late fee of $500. Regarding resources, this state regulator noted 
that they had created a bureau to handle PBM oversight, with 30 full-time 
equivalent positions, including a team of examiners, and authority to 
contract with outside consultants. In contrast, regulators from another 
state said that with only 3.5 staff in their department, they are limited in 
their ability to conduct oversight.
56 
Reducing ambiguous or fragmented authority. Regulators from two 
states identified ambiguous or fragmented authority over different aspects 
of PBM activities as factors that limited their authority to enforce PBM 
laws. Regulators from one state said that their department is charged with 
collecting high-level information from PBMs through the registration 
process, but that the state law does not give the department direct 
oversight authority over PBMs. Further, the regulators said they only have 
jurisdiction over enrollee-facing practices—such as requirements 
pertaining to drug formularies or the adequacy of pharmacy networks—
 
56Two pharmacy associations stressed the need for enforcement, noting that PBMs may 
not comply with state requirements if there is no threat of consequences, while a health 
plan association identified the lack of compliance monitoring as an impediment to 
regulatory compliance. 
===PAGE 29===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 25 GAO-24-106898  Prescription Drugs 
but not over PBMs’ dealings with pharmacies or health plans in their 
state. 
Regulators from another state noted that oversight authority in their state 
is split among three different divisions depending on the PBM function—
specifically, the Board of Pharmacy when PBMs perform the functions of 
a pharmacist, the Department of Insurance when they act as payers of 
claims, and the state Attorney General in all other cases. Moreover, 
regulators said that the Department of Insurance’s authority falls within 
the state’s insurance code which allows them to address reimbursement 
and payment issues. However, the regulators said duties related to 
managing pharmacy benefits fall under the state’s public health and 
safety code, and the laws do not clearly specify which agencies are 
supposed to enforce these provisions. The national advocacy 
organization representing employers’ interests further described an 
inconsistent patchwork of laws across states, with many plans operating 
across state lines and needing to navigate this patchwork. 
Clarity and precision in requirements. Three state regulators 
commented on the need for clear requirements to minimize unintended 
exceptions that may lessen compliance. Specifically, the regulators 
expressed that in order for PBM laws to be most effective, regulators 
should (1) be very clear about the information that PBMs must provide 
and how to report the data, and (2) provide clear, functional definitions for 
important terms.
57 For example, according to regulators in two states, 
some PBMs avoided complying with rebate pass-through requirements by 
defining these payments as fees. 
Regulators in a third state described another situation where terminology 
can affect PBM behavior. Specifically, the officials said that PBMs there 
insist that financial penalties be referred to as “warnings,” rather than 
penalties, because, according to the officials, having a record of penalties 
imposed by state regulators can prevent PBMs from obtaining federal 
contracts. This is a concern for large PBMs that may bid for business 
under federal programs, they said. 
Information on PBMs across different kinds of plans. Three state 
regulators expressed their desire to have more information on pharmacy 
 
57In addition to providing PBMs and health plans with better clarity regarding their states’ 
requirements, one state regulator also commented on the importance of obtaining input 
from technical experts on the feasibility of PBMs’ ability to report the proposed 
requirements. 
===PAGE 30===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 26 GAO-24-106898  Prescription Drugs 
benefit managers serving self-insured plans, similar to the transparency 
that fully insured plans must demonstrate in their states. Regulators in 
these three states described how concerns regarding ERISA preemption 
of state regulation of self-insured plans affected the enactment or 
enforcement of PBM laws in their states and resulted in less transparency 
for PBMs serving self-insured plans. For example, an ERISA preemption 
issue that regulators in one state said they contend with relates to 
situations in which PBMs serving fully insured plans lose revenue due to 
PBM regulations, like limits or prohibitions on certain fees. The regulators 
said that, in such situations, PBMs may seek to recover those funds from 
other types of health plans, including self-insured health plans. These 
state regulators believed that ERISA preemption prevents the state from 
knowing whether or to what extent this may be happening, they said. 
Regulators in another state similarly noted that their state’s narrow 
authority prevents them from having insight into PBMs serving self-
insured plans. Regulators in a third state said that they are unable to hold 
PBMs serving self-insured health plans to the higher standards applicable 
to fully insured health plans until it is clearer which areas of PBM 
regulation are federally preempted by ERISA. 
An official from the national advocacy organization representing 
employers’ interests agreed with the need for greater transparency over 
pharmacy benefit managers and noted that some states have enacted 
laws that align with their PBM reform goals. However, the official also 
expressed concern about state regulation of PBMs that may conflict with 
one of the purposes of ERISA preemption—to allow large employers the 
ability to design uniform plans across multiple states. State regulation that 
varies widely across an employers’ multiple locations also increases the 
employers’ costs, according to the PBM trade association. 
The Department of Labor provided technical comments on a draft copy of 
this report, which we incorporated as appropriate. 
As agreed with your offices, unless you publicly announce the contents of 
this report earlier, we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the 
report date. At that time, we will send copies to the Secretary of Labor. In 
addition, the report will be available at no charge on the GAO website at 
http://www.gao.gov. 
  
Agency Comments 
 
===PAGE 31===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 27 GAO-24-106898  Prescription Drugs 
If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact 
me at (202) 512-7114 or DickenJ@gao.gov. Contact points for our Offices 
of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last 
page of this report. GAO staff who made key contributions to this report 
are listed in appendix III. 
 
John E. Dicken 
Director, Health Care  

===PAGE 32===
 
Appendix I: Stakeholders Interviewed by GAO 
 
 
 
 
Page 28 GAO-24-106898  Prescription Drugs 
To obtain the perspective of relevant stakeholders for this report, we 
interviewed regulators, health plan associations, and pharmacy 
associations from a selection of five states, as well as representatives 
from four national organizations. 
State regulators. Arkansas Insurance Department, California 
Department of Managed Health Care, Louisiana Department of 
Insurance, Maine Bureau of Insurance, and New York Department of 
Financial Services. 
Health plan associations. California Association of Health Plans, 
Louisiana Association of Health Plans, Maine Association of Health 
Plans, and New York Health Plan Association. In one state where there 
was no health plan association, we instead met with the state’s largest 
insurer—Arkansas Blue Cross/Blue Shield—since the insurer covered 86 
percent of individuals in the state in 2022. 
State pharmacy associations. Arkansas Pharmacists Association, 
California Pharmacists Association, Louisiana Independent Pharmacies 
Association, Maine Pharmacy Association, and Pharmacists Society of 
the State of New York. 
National organizations. Pharmacy Care Management Association (a 
trade association representing PBMs), the Business Group on Health, 
Patients for Affordable Drugs Now, and the Pharmaceutical Research and 
Manufacturers of America. 
  
Appendix I: Stakeholders Interviewed by 
GAO 
===PAGE 33===
 
Appendix II: Stakeholders Views on Areas of 
State Pharmacy Benefit Manager (PBM) 
Regulation in Five Selected States 
 
 
 
 
Page 29 GAO-24-106898  Prescription Drugs 
Most state regulators, pharmacy associations, and national advocacy 
organizations we interviewed in five selected states—Arkansas, 
California, Louisiana, Maine, and New York—supported state efforts to 
regulate PBMs. These efforts included laws that states enacted regarding 
drug pricing and pharmacy reimbursement, increased transparency about 
PBM business practices, and increased access by independent and 
community pharmacies to PBM pharmacy networks. Most health plan 
associations and the PBM trade association we interviewed opposed 
state actions regulating pharmacy reimbursement and network design, 
but some health plan associations supported increasing transparency 
along the entire pharmaceutical supply chain. 
All five state regulators, all five pharmacy associations, and three national 
advocacy organizations we interviewed supported state regulation of drug 
pricing and pharmacy reimbursements for PBMs. However, four health 
plan associations and the PBM trade association generally opposed state 
regulation of PBM drug pricing and pharmacy reimbursement practices. 
• Rebates. Regulators from three states, four pharmacy associations, 
and three national advocacy associations supported policies 
regulating PBM’s use of rebates but differed in the policies they 
favored. 
• Application of the rebate. One national advocacy association 
representing pharmaceutical manufacturers said that rebates 
should be applied at the point-of-sale to offset prescription drug 
costs at the counter. However, a health plan said that rebates 
should go to the health plan so that all members, not only those 
receiving prescription drugs, can benefit from rebates through 
lower premiums. 
• Rebate transparency. Two stakeholders also expressed support 
for rebate reporting requirements. A patient advocacy organization 
representative stated that rebate transparency would allow 
patients to see if drugs were on formularies because they are the 
most effective or because the PBM received greater rebates. 
Regulators from one state noted that despite having rebate 
reporting requirements in their state, the law has yet to have the 
desired impact of ensuring rebates are fully passed through to 
health plans and patients. 
• Spread pricing. Regulators from three states as well as officials from 
all five pharmacy associations and a national advocacy organization 
representing large employers’ healthcare interests supported spread 
pricing prohibitions due to the lack of transparency around spread 
Appendix II: Stakeholders Views on Areas of 
State Pharmacy Benefit Manager (PBM) 
Regulation in Five Selected States 
Stakeholder Views on 
PBM Laws Related to 
Drug Pricing and 
Pharmacy Reimbursement 
===PAGE 34===
 
Appendix II: Stakeholders Views on Areas of 
State Pharmacy Benefit Manager (PBM) 
Regulation in Five Selected States 
 
 
 
 
Page 30 GAO-24-106898  Prescription Drugs 
pricing and concerns that spread pricing increases prescription drug 
costs.1 Most health plan associations and the PBM trade association 
opposed spread pricing prohibitions, noting that spread pricing 
provides plans with flexibility to manage prescription drug costs. 
• Effect on prescription drug costs. A pharmacy association 
official stated that, prior to their state prohibiting spread pricing, 
the state insurance commissioner found that spread pricing was 
contributing to rising prescription drug costs. Regulators from one 
state noted that the state took action to prohibit spread pricing 
after the states’ largest health plan elected a spread pricing 
option. The state regulators said that following pharmacist 
complaints, the state banned spread pricing and was able to 
successfully ensure that pharmacies were being paid what health 
plans paid for prescriptions. However, the state did not yet have 
information on whether or the extent to which prohibiting spread 
pricing has affected prescription drug costs. Officials from another 
pharmacy association stated that since PBMs in their state are 
only required to report the average spread, they are unable to see 
the extent to which spread pricing is occurring in their state. 
• Cost flexibility. Three health plan associations, a non-profit 
health plan, and the PBM trade association supported allowing 
spread pricing as an option to provide flexibility for plans in 
managing their pharmacy benefits. Health plan officials said that 
spread pricing offered the health plan increased flexibility and 
stated that a spread pricing contract cost the health plan $8 million 
less than a traditional pass-through contract. Additionally, officials 
from a health plan association also noted that many health plans 
in their state felt they had better pricing options prior to the 
implementation of the state ban on spread pricing. 
• Retroactive payment adjustments. One state regulator and two 
pharmacy associations supported states prohibiting retroactive 
pharmacy payment reductions by PBMs. Pharmacy associations refer 
to these retroactive payment adjustments as “clawbacks.” Officials 
from one of the pharmacy associations noted that their state’s 
clawback ban had effectively eliminated retroactive reimbursement 
adjustments filed by PBMs. Officials from another pharmacy 
association located in a state where clawbacks were not prohibited 
told us that clawbacks were based on seemingly arbitrary benchmarks 
set by PBMs and caused pharmacies to lose money on claims. 
 
1Spread pricing is when PBMs reimburse pharmacies at one rate and charge health plans 
a different rate, retaining any positive difference as revenue. 
===PAGE 35===
 
Appendix II: Stakeholders Views on Areas of 
State Pharmacy Benefit Manager (PBM) 
Regulation in Five Selected States 
 
 
 
 
Page 31 GAO-24-106898  Prescription Drugs 
• Regulation of pharmacy reimbursement. Officials from all five 
pharmacy associations supported existing laws that regulate 
pharmacy reimbursement and in some states advocated for additional 
legislation. However, officials from a health plan association opposed 
state efforts to regulate pharmacy reimbursement levels. Pharmacy 
association officials from two selected states said that their states’ 
Medicaid program fixed pharmacy reimbursement that is equal to a 
flat fee per prescription plus the pharmacy’s acquisition cost. The 
pharmacy association officials said that these laws ensure 
pharmacies serving Medicaid patients have a reliable revenue stream 
and do not lose money dispensing prescription drugs. Regulators from 
one of these states supported expanding these same requirements to 
commercial plans. One health plan association official stated that 
reimbursement and payment laws restrict patient access to 
medication in rural areas. For example, the same official noted that 
their state has a “decline to dispense” law that allows pharmacists to 
decline to fill a prescription if the PBM reimburses the pharmacy 
below the prescription’s acquisition cost, which could affect patients’ 
ability to access prescriptions in rural areas. 
• Maximum allowable costs (MAC). Three stakeholders commented 
on state laws that regulate MAC lists. One pharmacy association 
official stated that they have seen increased pharmacy 
reimbursements in their state following the enactment of MAC list 
pricing legislation. This official noted a specific example where the 
pharmacy association was able to successfully challenge an 
inadequate reimbursement because of MAC list transparency 
requirements. Officials from a health plan association opposed 
regulating MAC lists because they said such laws can lead to higher 
co-pays for patients since the PBM is unable to adjust MAC list prices 
when needed. 
All stakeholder types we interviewed expressed support for PBM 
transparency requirements such as licensure, registration, and annual 
reporting on rebates and revenue sources. Regulators from all five states, 
officials from four pharmacy associations, officials from one health plan, 
and officials from three national advocacy organizations expressed 
support for PBM transparency requirements. Additionally, officials from 
three health plan associations supported transparency requirements that 
applied to all actors along the pharmaceutical supply chain such as 
manufacturers and wholesalers. However, some stakeholders we 
interviewed noted that some transparency laws do not go far enough and 
do not allow state regulatory agencies to collect information on such 
things as PBM revenue and expenses, rebate data, or spread pricing 
Stakeholder Views on 
PBM Laws Related to 
Transparency 
===PAGE 36===
 
Appendix II: Stakeholders Views on Areas of 
State Pharmacy Benefit Manager (PBM) 
Regulation in Five Selected States 
 
 
 
 
Page 32 GAO-24-106898  Prescription Drugs 
information. Additionally, some stakeholders said that it is too soon to 
draw conclusions based on the collected data. 
• PBM transparency and reporting across all plan types. Regulators 
from three states noted that their licensure, registration, and reporting 
requirements were generally applicable to PBMs serving all types of 
plans including Medicare Part D or self-insured plans. Regulators from 
one of these states said that they had the authority to inspect the 
record of any PBM, such as those contracting with self-insured or Part 
D plans, even if they cannot regulate the plans directly. 
• Shortcomings and additional reporting requirements. Officials 
from a state regulator said that, while the additional insight from 
transparency requirements has allowed them to observe changes on 
an individual basis, it is too soon to draw conclusions on a 
systemwide basis. Officials from two pharmacy associations echoed 
this sentiment and noted that data is not yet available or too complex 
to be useful to consumers. Additionally, regulators from four states 
told us that additional information is needed to gain a better 
understanding of prescription drug cost drivers. For example, one 
state regulator said that despite having transparency laws, they have 
relatively limited information on PBM revenue sources and rebates. 
Similarly, officials with a patient advocacy organization stated that 
even with mandatory PBM reporting, other parts of the supply chain, 
and their effect on spending, will remain opaque. 
• Reporting challenges. Three health plan associations expressed 
support for transparent reporting requirements along the entire 
pharmaceutical supply chain, including (for example) pharmaceutical 
manufacturers, wholesalers, and health plans. Two health plans 
associations warned against unreasonable reporting requirements 
due to the potential to increase costs and administrative burdens. 
Regulators from one state said that transparency laws should reflect 
the technological capabilities of PBMs to report the information 
requested by the state. One health plan association noted that 
transparency requirements alone may not address escalating 
prescription drug costs and instead create new administrative barriers 
without lowering costs. 
All state regulators, most pharmacy associations, and two national 
advocacy organizations we interviewed supported PBM laws regarding 
pharmacy networks, such as legislation addressing differences in 
reimbursement between PBM and non-PBM affiliated pharmacies as well 
as regulating utilization management practices, while four health plan 
associations we interviewed opposed limits on how PBMs create 
Stakeholder Views on 
PBM Laws Related to 
Pharmacy Networks and 
Access 
===PAGE 37===
 
Appendix II: Stakeholders Views on Areas of 
State Pharmacy Benefit Manager (PBM) 
Regulation in Five Selected States 
 
 
 
 
Page 33 GAO-24-106898  Prescription Drugs 
pharmacy networks. Regulators from one state and officials from a 
pharmacy association supported “any willing provider” laws, which require 
PBMs to contract with any pharmacy willing to accept the terms of their 
contract, noting that these laws are an important consumer protection and 
allow pharmacies to gain access to PBM networks. Four health plan 
associations and the PBM trade association stated that network access 
laws hinder their ability to control costs and manage pharmacy quality. 
• Equal pharmacy reimbursement for independent and PBM-
owned or affiliated pharmacies. Regulators from one state and an 
official from one pharmacy association told us that prior to enacting 
patient access laws addressing pharmacy networks, they found 
independent and community pharmacies were being reimbursed at 
lower rates than PBM-affiliated pharmacies. Officials from a pharmacy 
association stated, and provided documentation to show, that patients 
were receiving mail telling them their pharmacy was out of network, 
only to receive additional correspondence that the letter was sent in 
error after they had already switched to an in-network pharmacy. 
• Utilization management and formulary development. An official 
from the national advocacy organization representing patient interests 
stated that certain utilization management practices can prevent 
patients from accessing drugs prescribed by their physician. Another 
official, from the organization representing pharmaceutical 
manufacturers, noted that 79 percent of prescriptions go through three 
PBMs, and therefore it is difficult to access necessary drugs that are 
not on those PBM’s formularies. 
• Cost and quality control. Four health plan associations and the PBM 
trade association stated that network access laws hinder PBMs ability 
to control costs and monitor pharmacy quality. Officials from two 
health plan associations stated that PBMs offer a variety of formulary 
and network options that health plans can select based on cost 
needs. A health plan association said that the network and formulary 
a health plan selects is based on network needs and the costs plans 
are willing to accept. Another health plan association official stated 
that they believed network access laws limit PBM’s ability to control 
costs. The PBM trade association noted that some any willing 
provider laws have been challenged in courts and that network 
adequacy laws can impact health plans’ margins. 
===PAGE 38===
 
Appendix III: GAO Contact and Staff 
Acknowledgments 
 
 
 
 
Page 34 GAO-24-106898  Prescription Drugs 
John Dicken, (202) 512-7114 or DickenJ@gao.gov 
In addition to the contact named above, Iola D’Souza (Assistant Director), 
Perry Parsons (Analyst-in-Charge), Tim Planert, Emily Wilson Schwark, 
and Christopher Wolf made key contributions to this report. Michelle 
Duren, Joy Grossman, David Jones, Laurie Pachter, and Jennifer 
Whitworth also made important contributions. 
 
Appendix III: GAO Contact and Staff 
Acknowledgments 
GAO Contact 
Staff 
Acknowledgments 
===PAGE 39===
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Government Accountability Office, the audit, evaluation, and investigative 
arm of Congress, exists to support Congress in meeting its constitutional 
responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the 
federal government for the American people. GAO examines the use of public 
funds; evaluates federal programs and policies; and provides analyses, 
recommendations, and other assistance to help Congress make informed 
oversight, policy, and funding decisions. GAO’s commitment to good government 
is reflected in its core values of accountability, integrity, and reliability. 
The fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of GAO documents at no cost is 
through our website. Each weekday afternoon, GAO posts on its website newly 
released reports, testimony, and correspondence. You can also subscribe to 
GAO’s email updates to receive notification of newly posted products. 
The price of each GAO publication reflects GAO’s actual cost of production and 
distribution and depends on the number of pages in the publication and whether 
the publication is printed in color or black and white. Pricing and ordering 
information is posted on GAO’s website, https://www.gao.gov/ordering.htm.  
Place orders by calling (202) 512-6000, toll free (866) 801-7077, or  
TDD (202) 512-2537. 
Orders may be paid for using American Express, Discover Card, MasterCard, 
Visa, check, or money order. Call for additional information. 
Connect with GAO on Facebook, Flickr, Twitter, and YouTube. 
Subscribe to our RSS Feeds or Email Updates. Listen to our Podcasts. 
Visit GAO on the web at https://www.gao.gov. 
Contact FraudNet: 
Website:
 https://www.gao.gov/about/what-gao-does/fraudnet 
Automated answering system: (800) 424-5454 or (202) 512-7700 
A. Nicole Clowers, Managing Director, ClowersA@gao.gov, (202) 512-4400, U.S. 
Government Accountability Office, 441 G Street NW, Room 7125, Washington, 
DC 20548 
Chuck Young, Managing Director, youngc1@gao.gov, (202) 512-4800 
U.S. Government Accountability Office, 441 G Street NW, Room 7149  
Washington, DC 20548 
Stephen J. Sanford, Managing Director, spel@gao.gov, (202) 512-4707 
U.S. Government Accountability Office, 441 G Street NW, Room 7814, 
Washington, DC 20548 
GAO’s Mission 
Obtaining Copies of 
GAO Reports and 
Testimony 
Order by Phone 
Connect with GAO 
To Report Fraud, 
Waste, and Abuse in 
Federal Programs 
Congressional 
Relations 
Public Affairs 
Strategic Planning and 
External Liaison 
Please P rint on Recycled Paper.