
===PAGE 1===
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MEDICARE PART D 
Use of Pharmacy 
Benefit Managers and 
Efforts to Manage 
Drug Expenditures 
and Utilization 
 
 
 
Report to Congressional Requesters 
July 2019 
 
GAO-19-498 
 
 
United States Government Accountability Office 

===PAGE 2===
 
  United States Government Accountability Office 
  
Highlights of GAO-19-498, a report to 
congressional requesters 
 
July 2019 
MEDICARE PART D  
Use of Pharmacy Benefit Managers and Efforts to 
Manage Drug Expenditures and Utilization 
 
What GAO Found 
Medicare Part D plan sponsors used pharmacy benefit managers (PBM) to 
provide 74 percent of drug benefit management services and performed the 
remaining 26 percent of services themselves in 2016—the most recent year of 
data at the time of our analysis. Plan sponsors are private entities that operate 
drug plans; PBMs are organizations that help manage drug benefits.  
 
Rebates and other price concessions—discounts generally paid by 
manufacturers to Part D plan sponsors and PBMs after the sale of a drug at the 
pharmacy—grew faster than Part D expenditures from 2014 through 2016. 
Specifically, gross expenditures (the amount paid to pharmacies by plan 
sponsors, or by the PBM on the sponsor’s behalf, and by the beneficiary) 
increased 20 percent, to $145.1 billion. During this period, rebates and other 
price concessions increased 66 percent, to $29 billion—20 percent of 2016 gross 
expenditures. Consequently, net expenditures (gross expenditures less rebates 
and other price concessions) increased only 13 percent, to $116.1 billion. 
 
Gross Medicare Part D Expenditures, Net Part D Expenditures, and Rebates and 
Other Price Concessions for All Part D Drugs, 2014-2016 (in billions of dollars) 
 
 
 
PBMs primarily earned Part D revenue through a volume-based fee paid by plan 
sponsors based on PBM-processed claims; a per-member, per-month fee paid 
by plan sponsors; or a combination of the two. PBMs also earned revenue from 
the rebates they negotiated with manufacturers for Part D drugs, which 
accounted for $18 billion of the $26.7 billion in rebates in 2016. PBMs retained 
less than 1 percent of these rebates, passing the rest to plan sponsors. Plan 
sponsors in turn may use rebates to help offset the growth in drug costs, helping 
control premiums for beneficiaries. 
 
The Department of Health and Human Services provided technical comments on 
a draft of this report, which GAO incorporated as appropriate. 
 
View GAO-19-498. For more information, 
contact John Dicken at (202) 512-7114 or 
dickenj@gao.gov. 
Why GAO Did This Study 
Total expenditures for the Medicare 
Part D drug program exceeded $100 
billion in 2016. Part D plan sponsors 
may use a PBM to provide drug benefit 
management services for Part D 
coverage, such as negotiating drug 
rebates and other price concessions 
and paying pharmacy claims. 
Policymakers have sought a better 
understanding of PBMs’ roles in the 
drug supply chain and plans’ and 
PBMs’ efforts to manage Part D drug 
spending and use. 
 
GAO was asked to examine the role of 
PBMs in the Part D program. This 
report examines, among other 
objectives, (1) the extent to which Part 
D plan sponsors use PBMs, (2) trends 
in rebates and other price concessions 
obtained by both PBMs and plan 
sponsors for Part D drugs, and (3) how 
PBMs earn revenue for services 
provided to Part D plans.  
GAO analyzed Centers for Medicare & 
Medicaid Services (CMS) data on Part 
D plan sponsors’ use of PBMs in 2016 
as well as CMS drug expenditure, 
pricing, and rebate and other price 
concession data for all Part D drugs 
from 2014 through 2016 (the most 
recent available data at the time of our 
analysis). GAO reviewed service 
agreements between Part D plan 
sponsors and PBMs that were 
approved by CMS from January 2016 
through May 2018 and had the highest 
enrollment as of June 2018. GAO 
spoke with CMS officials and 38 
stakeholder groups including PBMs, 
Part D plan sponsors, pharmacy 
representatives and drug 
manufacturers.  
 
 
===PAGE 3===
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page i GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
Letter  1 
Background 9 
Part D Plan Sponsors Used a PBM to Provide Most Drug Benefit 
Management Services in 2016, and Use Was Concentrated 
among Five PBMs 14 
PBMs Primarily Earned Part D Revenue through Fees Paid by 
Plan Sponsors, Not Rebate Retention, and Reported That This 
Differed from PBMs’ Commercial Plan Revenue 16 
Rebates and Other Price Concessions Grew Faster Than Part D 
Expenditures from 2014 through 2016 18 
Part D Drug Prices Were Significantly Lower Than List Prices for 
Brand-Name Drugs in Retail Pharmacies; Drugs Sold in 
Specialty Pharmacies Received Fewer Discounts 24 
Utilization Management Was Generally Associated with Financial 
Savings and Improved Health Indicators, but Its Effect on 
Medication Adherence and Access Was Less Clear 26 
Agency Comments 28 
Appendix I Objectives, Scope, and Methodology 29
 
 
Appendix II Medicare Part D Plan Sponsors’ Use of Pharmacy Benefit  
Managers (PBM) 39 
 
Appendix III Information on Pharmacy Benefit Manager (PBM) Revenue  
Earned from Manufacturers and from Spread Pricing 45 
 
Appendix IV Expenditures and Rebate and Other Price Concession Information  
for Medicare Part D Drugs 47 
 
Appendix V Information on Discounts Off Manufacturer List Prices for  
Brand-Name and Generic Medicare Part D Drugs 54 
 
Contents 
===PAGE 4===
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page ii GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
Appendix VI Studies and Stakeholders’ Views on Effects of Utilization  
Management Services 63 
 
Appendix VII Bibliography of Peer Reviewed Studies Used in GAO’s Literature  
Review 71 
 
Appendix VIII GAO Contact and Staff Acknowledgments 78 
 
Tables 
Table 1: Rebates and Other Price Concessions and Expenditures 
for the Highest Expenditure, Highest Utilization Brand-
Name Medicare Part D Drugs, 2016 21 
Table 2: Percentage Change in Rebates and Other Price 
Concessions and Expenditures for the Highest 
Expenditure,  Highest Utilization Brand-Name Medicare 
Part D Drugs, 2014-2016 22 
Table 3: Rebates and Other Price Concessions Received by 
Medicare Part D Plan Sponsors That Used a Pharmacy 
Benefit Manager (PBM) for Rebate Negotiations and 
Those That Did Not, 2016 23 
Table 4: Number of Medicare Part D Plan Contracts That Used 
Top Five Pharmacy Benefit Managers (PBM) for Drug 
Benefit Management Services, 2016 43 
Table 5: Expenditures and Rebates and Other Price Concessions 
for the 444 Highest Expenditure, Highest Utilization 
Medicare Part D Brand-Name Drugs, by Therapeutic 
Class, 2016 51 
Table 6: Gross and Net Expenditure Information for the 17 
Medicare Part D Plan Sponsors GAO Interviewed, 2016 52 
Table 7: Medicare Part D Median Unit Drug Part D Prices as a 
Percentage of Manufacturer List Prices for the Highest 
Expenditure, Highest Utilization Brand-Name Drugs Sold 
in Retail and Specialty Pharmacies, 2016 55 
Table 8: Medicare Part D Median Unit Drug Prices as a 
Percentage of Manufacturer List Prices by Therapeutic 
Class for the Highest Expenditure, Highest Utilization 
Brand-name Drugs Sold in Retail Pharmacies, 2016 56 
===PAGE 5===
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page iii GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
Table 9: Medicare Part D Median Unit Drug Prices as a 
Percentage of Manufacturer List Prices for the Highest 
Expenditure, Highest Utilization Generic Drugs Sold in 
Retail and Specialty Pharmacies, 2016 60 
Table 10: Medicare Part D Median Unit Drug Prices as a 
Percentage of Manufacturer List Prices by Therapeutic 
Class for the Highest Expenditure, Highest Utilization 
Generic Drugs Sold in Retail Pharmacies, 2016 61 
Table 11: Medicare Part D Median Unit Drug Prices as a 
Percentage of Manufacturer List Prices by Therapeutic 
Class for the Highest Expenditure, Highest Utilization 
Generic Drugs Sold in Specialty Pharmacies, 2016 62 
 
Figures 
Figure 1: Example of the Flow of Funds and Prescription Drugs 
through the Supply Chain when a Medicare Part D 
Beneficiary Purchases a Drug through a Part D Plan 
Sponsor Using a Pharmacy Benefit Manager (PBM) 10 
Figure 2: Gross Medicare Part D Expenditures, Net Part D 
Expenditures, Rebates and Other Price Concessions for 
All Part D Drugs, 2014-2016 (in billions of dollars) 19 
Figure 3: Medicare Part D Median Drug Prices as a Percentage of 
Manufacturer List Prices for Highest Expenditure and 
Highest Utilization Brand-Name Drugs, 2016 25 
Figure 4: Medicare Part D Plan Sponsor Contract Use of 
Pharmacy Benefit Managers (PBM) for 10 Drug Benefit 
Management Services, by Percent of Contracts, 2016 40 
Figure 5: Number of Pharmacy Benefit Managers (PBM) Used for 
10 Drug Benefit Management Services by Percent of All 
Medicare Part D Plan Sponsor Contracts, 2016 41 
Figure 6: Pharmacy-related Price Concessions, 2014-2016 48 
Figure 7: Rebates and Other Price Concessions Received for the 
Highest-Expenditure, Highest-Utilization Medicare Part D 
Brand-Name Drugs as a Proportion of Their Gross 
Expenditures, 2016 50 
Figure 8: Medicare Part D Drug Prices as a Percentage of 
Manufacturer List Prices for the Highest Expenditure, 
Highest Utilization Generic Drugs Sold in Retail and 
Specialty Pharmacies, 2016 58 
 
 
===PAGE 6===
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page iv GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abbreviations 
 
AWP  average wholesale price 
CMS   Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services 
DIR  direct and indirect remuneration 
HHS  Department of Health and Human Services 
HPMS  Health Plan Management System  
ISDR  Ingredient, strength, dosage, and route of administration 
NADAC National Average Drug Acquisition Cost 
PACE  Program of All-inclusive Care for the Elderly 
PBM  Pharmacy Benefit Manager 
PDE  prescription drug event 
PDP  prescription drug plan 
PSAO   Pharmacy Services Administrative Organization 
 
This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the 
United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety 
without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain 
copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be 
necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. 
===PAGE 7===
 
 
 
Page 1 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
441 G St. N.W. 
Washington, DC 20548 
July 15, 2019 
The Honorable Susan Collins 
Chairman 
Special Committee on Aging 
United States Senate 
The Honorable Richard Neal 
Chairman 
Committee on Ways and Means 
House of Representatives 
Medicare Part D is the voluntary program that provides outpatient 
prescription drug coverage for Medicare beneficiaries who enroll in Part D 
drug plans.1 Total Part D program expenditures were more than $100 
billion in 2016, the most recent data at the time of our analysis. These 
expenditures account for the amount paid to pharmacies by Part D plan 
sponsors, or by a pharmacy benefit manager PBM (PBM) on the 
sponsors’ behalf, and by beneficiaries for Part D drugs. Part D plan 
sponsors—which are private companies—contract with the Centers for 
Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) to provide this prescription drug 
coverage to Medicare beneficiaries.
2 Plan sponsors may have multiple 
contracts with CMS, with each contract providing one or more distinct 
drug plans.3 Plans may charge different monthly premiums and have 
different beneficiary cost-sharing arrangements—such as deductibles and 
cost-sharing for covered drugs.4 
                                                                                                                       
1Beneficiaries may receive Part D coverage through either stand-alone Part D prescription 
drug plans (PDPs) that supplement traditional Medicare or through Medicare Advantage 
(Part C) plans that generally must cover all Medicare benefits and usually offer Part D 
coverage.  
2PBMs are organizations that help manage drug benefits.  
3For example, a Part D plan sponsor may have contracts covering various regions of the 
country. Plans covered under the same contract may differ in their benefit structure, the 
drugs they cover, and the pharmacies they contract with to fill prescriptions. In this report, 
we refer to a drug plan or plans covered under each sponsor contract with CMS as a “Part 
D plan sponsor contract.” 
4A deductible is a fixed dollar amount that beneficiaries must pay before coverage takes 
effect. Part D plan sponsor payments to pharmacies generally include a portion that the 
beneficiary pays, known as cost-sharing, which may be a flat amount (copayment) or a 
percentage of the drug’s costs (coinsurance).  
Letter 
 
===PAGE 8===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 2 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
There are a number of services associated with providing a drug benefit, 
including establishing networks of pharmacies and negotiating rebates 
and other price concessions from manufacturers. One drug benefit 
management service that is often performed is utilization management, a 
process to help ensure that the use of drugs and other medical services is 
based on medical necessity, efficiency, and appropriateness. Part D plan 
sponsors may perform these drug benefit services themselves or have 
them performed by PBMs. PBMs have come under scrutiny as 
policymakers have attempted to better understand their role in the drug 
supply chain and plan sponsors’ and PBMs’ efforts to manage Part D 
drug spending and use. 
You asked us to provide an overview of the role of PBMs in the Medicare 
Part D program. This report examines: 
1. the extent to which Part D plan sponsors use PBMs to deliver drug 
benefit management services to Medicare beneficiaries; 
2. how PBMs earn revenue from the services they provide to Part D plan 
sponsors; 
3. trends in rebates and other price concessions obtained by Part D plan 
sponsors and PBMs from drug manufacturers and others; 
4. the extent to which prices for Part D drugs are discounted off of 
manufacturer list prices; and 
5. what is known about savings and other effects of utilization 
management services commonly used in Part D plans. 
 
To examine the extent to which Part D plan sponsors contract with PBMs 
to deliver drug benefit management services to Medicare beneficiaries, 
we analyzed CMS Health Plan Management System (HPMS) data for 
2016, the most recent available expenditure and rebate and other price 
concession data at the time of our analysis. The data identified the entity 
or entities responsible for performing each of 10 drug benefit 
management services under plan sponsors’ Part D contracts.
5 According 
to CMS, these are the key drug benefit management services associated 
with providing Part D drug coverage and include paying pharmacy claims 
                                                                                                                       
5HPMS is CMS’s web-based system through which Part D plan sponsors report their bids 
and other contract information to CMS. According to CMS, Part D plan sponsors are to 
report the entities responsible for performing these services on an ongoing basis.  
===PAGE 9===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 3 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
and negotiating rebates and other price concessions.6 CMS provided 
HPMS data for the 624 Part D plan sponsor contracts that were effective 
in 2016.7 For each contract, we used the HPMS data to determine the 
extent to which a plan sponsor performed a service itself, contracted with 
a PBM to perform the service, or performed the service in coordination 
with a PBM. In this report, we refer to any organization (other than the 
plan sponsor itself) that provides one of the 10 drug benefit management 
services to a plan sponsor as a PBM. 
To examine how PBMs earn revenue for the services they provide to Part 
D plan sponsors, we examined 20 service agreements between PBMs 
and Part D plan sponsors.
8 These agreements generally contain detailed 
information on the services that the PBM will provide, how the plan 
sponsor will pay the PBMs for those services, and the rates pharmacies 
will be paid for prescription drugs.9 The 20 service agreements were 
those approved between January 2016 and May 2018 that had the 
highest enrollment in June 2018, the most recent data available at the 
time of our analysis.
10 
We also examined PBM revenue reported to CMS by Part D plan 
sponsors in their rebates and other price concession data reports—also 
referred to as direct and indirect remuneration (DIR)—in 2016, the most 
                                                                                                                       
6The eight other services are: pharmacy network development, enrollment processing, 
enrollee appeals and grievance process management, customer service, management of 
a pharmacy and therapeutics committee, coordination with other drug benefit programs, 
pharmacy technical assistance, and drug benefit administration. Instead of being reported 
as one of the 10 distinct services, utilization management services may be included under 
several of the 10 prescription drug benefit services that plan sponsors report to CMS in 
the HPMS data.  
7These 624 contracts provided 4,663 unique plans and were operated by 207 Part D plan 
sponsors in June 2016.  
8The service agreements and the provisions in those agreements that we examined are 
not generalizable to all service agreements that are in effect. 
9One service agreement did not have complete information on the primary way that the 
PBMs would be paid. CMS told us that payment information between Part D plan 
sponsors and PBMs may be omitted from information submitted to the agency if the 
sponsors consider it proprietary.  
10Part D plan sponsors are required to provide CMS their service agreements with PBMs 
for initial approval by the agency. They are also required to provide CMS with any 
changes to substantive provisions of the service agreements, such as payment provisions, 
but do not have to provide CMS with a new service agreement containing the changes. 
See 42 U.S.C. § 1395w-115(f)(1). 
===PAGE 10===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 4 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
recent data available at the time of our analysis. These data include 
information on any price concessions made after a drug is purchased 
from the pharmacy by a beneficiary. One type of price concession is a 
rebate, which is generally a discount paid by drug manufacturers to a Part 
D plan sponsor, or by a PBM on the sponsor’s behalf, after a beneficiary 
purchases a drug.
11 These discounts may be offered in exchange for 
better placement on a plan sponsor’s list of covered drugs, known as a 
formulary, which encourages the use of the manufacturer’s drugs by 
assigning them to tiers within the formulary that have lower beneficiary 
cost sharing.12 Plan sponsors and PBMs may receive other price 
concessions that lower the price of a drug. For example, plan sponsors 
may receive fees from pharmacies based on their performance, which 
affect prices for certain drugs since the performance fees affect the 
amount the plan sponsor pays the pharmacy.13 The rebate and other 
price concession reports also include information on any revenue earned 
by PBMs through their retaining a portion of negotiated rebates. We 
define the gross price of a drug as the total amount paid to the pharmacy 
by the Part D plan sponsor, the PBM on the sponsor’s behalf, and the 
beneficiary; gross price less rebates and other price concessions is the 
net price. The rebate and other price concession reports to CMS also 
include monies that are not concessions used in the calculation of net 
price, such as certain sources of PBM revenue, including fees paid by 
manufacturers to PBMs for certain services, as well as spread pricing—
                                                                                                                       
11Beneficiary cost-sharing is based on the price of the drug at the point of sale. Therefore, 
if a manufacturer provides a rebate after the point of sale, which, as noted, is generally the 
case, the beneficiary’s cost sharing is not reduced by the amount of the rebate. Other 
factors may affect the amount of beneficiary cost-sharing, such as beneficiaries paying 
more for drugs purchased at pharmacies not within the Part D plan sponsor’s preferred 
pharmacy network.  
12A formulary is a Part D plan sponsor’s list of covered drugs. Plan sponsors may assign 
drugs to different tiers within a formulary that correspond to different levels of beneficiary 
cost sharing. The tiers with lower cost sharing correspond to more favorable placement in 
the formulary to encourage beneficiaries to use lower cost drugs. Although rebates and 
other price concessions do not directly affect the price beneficiaries pay at the pharmacy, 
which is based on the price before any price concessions are applied, the presence of a 
rebate may affect their cost-sharing in other ways, such as by placing the drug on a 
preferred formulary tier with lower cost sharing in exchange for the rebate. 
13Part D plan sponsors and PBMs may enter into performance arrangements with 
pharmacies where they either pay a fee or receive a bonus based on their performance, 
such as a specified percent of prescriptions dispensed for a generic drug (instead of a 
brand-name drug). The revenue paid to pharmacies is considered an incentive payment 
and monies received from pharmacies by plan sponsors, or PBMs on their behalf, is 
considered a price concession.  
===PAGE 11===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 5 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
where PBMs earn revenue by keeping the difference between the amount 
they charged the pharmacy and the amount the they charged the plan for 
a drug. 
To examine trends in rebates and other price concessions obtained by 
Part D plan sponsors and PBMs from manufacturers and others for Part 
D drugs, we analyzed plan sponsors’ gross and net expenditures for 
these drugs from 2014 through 2016. For a given drug, gross 
expenditures reflect what was paid to the pharmacy by the Part D plan 
sponsor, PBMs on the sponsor’s behalf, and the beneficiary. To calculate 
gross expenditures, we used Medicare prescription drug event (PDE) 
data to calculate gross brand-name and generic drug expenditures and 
utilization for all Part D plan sponsors.
14 Net expenditures reflect any 
rebates and other price concessions obtained by Part D plan sponsors 
and PBMs after a beneficiary receives a drug. To calculate net 
expenditures, we obtained rebate and other price concession information 
and subtracted it from plan sponsors’ brand-name and generic gross 
expenditures. We identified brand-name and generic drugs by grouping 
expenditure claims with the same active ingredient, strength, dosage 
form, and route of administration.15 We also used CMS Part D enrollment 
data to examine gross and net expenditures per Medicare beneficiary for 
sponsor contracts in 2016.16 We also examined differences in the amount 
                                                                                                                       
14Part D plan sponsors—both PDPs and Medicare Advantage drug plans—submit a PDE 
record to CMS for each time a beneficiary obtains a prescription drug. The PDE record 
contains information on the beneficiary receiving the drug, the price paid by the plan 
sponsor to the pharmacy, and applicable beneficiary cost-sharing. We calculated 
expenditures based on a drug’s ingredient cost, dispensing fees, sales tax, and applicable 
vaccine administration fees for all Part D drugs. We excluded PDE claims billed under 
Programs of All-Inclusive Care for the Elderly plan contracts because they are exempted 
from certain Part D requirements, such as charging beneficiaries cost-sharing. We also 
excluded compounded drugs, which are tailor-made by a pharmacy for a beneficiary and 
over-the-counter drugs as they are generally not covered by Medicare Part D. We used 
information from Red Book, a compendium published by Truven Health Analytics, to 
identify brand-name and generic drugs and to determine drugs’ therapeutic class, dose, 
and route of administration. 
15The dosage form is the physical form in which a drug is produced and dispensed, such 
as a tablet or capsule; route of administration is the way of administering a drug to a site in 
a patient, such as taking a drug orally. 
16We used June 2016 data to indicate enrollment, as this month has relatively stable 
enrollment as it does not fall within an annual open enrollment period where beneficiaries 
may change their Part D coverage. 
===PAGE 12===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 6 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
of rebates and other price concessions relative to expenditures obtained 
by Part D plan sponsors that used a PBM, relative to those that did not.17 
To obtain more information on drugs that have the greatest fiscal impact 
on the Part D program and its beneficiaries, we calculated gross and net 
expenditures for the brand-name and generic drugs with the highest 
expenditures, highest utilization, and highest expenditure per utilization in 
2016. For both brand-name and generic drugs, we identified the following: 
the 200 brand-name and 200 generic drugs with the highest expenditures 
in 2016; the 200 brand-name and generic drugs with the highest 
utilization in 2016 (based on number of 30-day prescriptions); and the 200 
brand-name and generic drugs with the highest expenditures per 
utilization (i.e., highest expenditure per number of 30-day prescriptions). 
As a result of overlap in the groups of drugs, these criteria yielded lists of 
the 444 unique highest expenditure, highest utilization brand-name drugs 
and the 476 unique highest expenditure, highest utilization generic drugs. 
Together, these 920 highest expenditure, highest utilization brand-name 
and generic drugs accounted for 81 percent of Part D expenditures in 
2016.
18 
To examine the extent to which Part D drug prices are discounted off of 
manufacturer list prices, we compared the median gross and net prices 
for the 444 brand-name and 476 generic highest expenditure, highest 
utilization drugs to (1) list prices established by manufacturers and (2) the 
cost to pharmacies of acquiring these drugs. For the list price, we used 
the 2016 average wholesale price (AWP)—which we refer to as 
manufacturer list price—which reflects the average price manufacturers 
suggest wholesalers charge pharmacies for a drug.19 For pharmacy 
acquisition costs, which reflect the price pharmacies paid to obtain the 
drug, we used retail community pharmacy acquisition cost data from 
                                                                                                                       
17We determined PBM use through 2016 HPMS data that identified whether a Part D plan 
sponsor contract used a PBM for rebate and price concession negotiations with 
manufacturers, pharmacies, or others.  
18Of the 920 highest expenditure, highest utilization brand-name and generic drugs, the 
444 brand-name drugs accounted for 65 percent of expenditures, and the 476 generic 
drugs accounted for 16 percent of expenditures. 
19AWP is a list price and does not reflect the actual price paid by pharmacies or 
wholesalers for a drug. We obtained AWP information from Truven Analytics’ Red Book.  
===PAGE 13===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 7 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
National Average Drug Acquisition Cost (NADAC) data.20 Part D plan 
sponsors and PBMs acting on the sponsor’s behalf may negotiate prices 
paid to pharmacies that are lower than manufacturers’ list price, but 
higher than pharmacies’ acquisition costs. Separately, the plan sponsor 
or PBM may also receive rebates and other price concessions that are 
not part of their payments to pharmacies, but are reflected in their net 
price. We also calculated a gross Part D drug price using 2016 PDE data 
by dividing gross per unit expenditures for a given drug by the total 
quantity dispensed for the drug.21 To calculate a net Part D price, we 
subtracted rebates and other concessions per quantity dispensed from 
the gross per unit price. We separated drugs sold in retail community 
pharmacies from those sold in specialty pharmacies, as they dispense 
low-volume and high-cost drugs to patients undergoing intensive 
therapies for illnesses.
22 For each drug, we then determined median 
pharmacy acquisition costs, median gross Part D prices, and median net 
Part D prices as a proportion of median manufacturer list prices. 
To examine what is known about savings and other effects of utilization 
management services commonly used in Part D plans, we conducted a 
literature search for studies that examined the effect of utilization 
management services in Part D (regardless of whether they were 
provided by a PBM or another entity) on the following outcomes: (1) 
financial costs or savings, (2) beneficiaries’ health indicators, and (3) 
beneficiaries’ access to clinically appropriate medications or taking their 
medications as prescribed (adherence). The literature search was 
performed from April 2018 to July 2018 using keyword searches in 
bibliographic databases, including ProQuest, EBSCO, and Scopus. We 
limited our search to peer-reviewed studies published beginning in 
                                                                                                                       
20NADAC is obtained from a survey of community retail pharmacies and was developed to 
provide a national pricing benchmark for states’ Medicaid programs. NADAC does not 
contain data from non-retail pharmacies, such as mail-order or specialty pharmacies.  
21Quantity dispensed is the unit of measure for the drug such as milliliters or milligrams.  
22We determined whether a drug was sold in retail or specialty pharmacies based on 
NADAC data. We found that 97 percent of the 444 highest expenditure, highest utilization 
brand-name drugs that lacked NADAC were listed as specialty drugs on a Part D plan 
sponsor’s formulary. Given this, we refer to drugs that do not have a NADAC price as 
those sold in specialty pharmacies.  
===PAGE 14===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 8 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
2006—the year the Part D program began.23 We identified and reviewed 
52 studies that met these criteria. 
For all five of our objectives, we obtained the perspectives of 
stakeholders on Part D plan sponsors’ use of PBMs as well as their 
perspectives on sponsors’ efforts to control Part D expenditures and drug 
utilization. These stakeholders consisted of representatives from 17 
small, mid-sized, and large Part D plan sponsors; seven PBMs; three 
drug manufacturers; a wholesaler and pharmacy services administrative 
organization; and a patient advocacy organization.
24 
For all of the data we analyzed, we took steps to assure their reliability, 
including interviewing knowledgeable officials, conducting data checks, 
and comparing to published information when available. After taking 
these steps, we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the 
purposes of our reporting objectives. Appendix I provides additional 
details on our scope and methodology. 
We conducted this performance audit from May 2017 to July 2019 in 
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. 
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain 
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our 
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that 
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings based 
on our audit objectives. 
 
  
                                                                                                                       
23We analyzed utilization management services provided to Medicare beneficiaries 
without regard to who provided the service.  
24The 17 Part D plan sponsors consisted of 11 that had the 20 contracts with the largest 
enrollment in 2016 (enrollment in these contracts accounted for 82 percent of Part D 
enrollment in 2016); three that had contracts with enrollment at or just below the median 
2016 contract enrollment; and three that had three contracts with enrollment at or below 
the bottom enrollment quartile. We spoke with representatives from the six PBMs that 
provided the most drug benefit services to Part D plan sponsors in 2016 as identified by 
our analysis of HPMS data. We also spoke with the PBM that provided the eighth most 
drug benefit services to Part D plan sponsors. 
===PAGE 15===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 9 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
 
 
Several entities are involved with, and pay different prices for, prescription 
drugs as they move from the manufacturer to the beneficiary (a system 
referred to as the prescription drug supply chain). In general, 
manufacturers develop and sell their drugs to wholesalers, and 
wholesalers then sell the drugs to pharmacies. In the Part D program, 
CMS pays Part D plan sponsors to provide drug coverage, and plan 
sponsors may charge beneficiaries monthly premiums in exchange for 
coverage. Plan sponsors and PBMs negotiate reimbursement rates for 
the drugs provided to beneficiaries. When the beneficiary purchases a 
drug, the pharmacy is paid by the Part D plan sponsor, or through the 
PBM on the sponsor’s behalf, and by the beneficiary through any 
applicable cost-sharing. (See fig. 1 for a flow chart showing the 
relationship between certain entities in the prescription drug supply chain 
when a Part D plan sponsor uses a PBM.) 
Background 
Prescription Drug Supply 
Chain 
===PAGE 16===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 10 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
Figure 1: Example of the Flow of Funds and Prescription Drugs through the Supply Chain when a Medicare Part D Beneficiary 
Purchases a Drug through a Part D Plan Sponsor Using a Pharmacy Benefit Manager (PBM) 
 
Note: This flow chart illustrates the use of a PBM by a Medicare Part D plan sponsor to pay 
prescription drug claims and negotiate rebates and other price concessions with manufacturers and 
others. In some cases, Part D plan sponsors perform these activities themselves or in conjunction 
with a PBM. For example, a plan sponsor may use a PBM to pay the pharmacy for a drug, while 
negotiating rebates directly with the manufacturer. In addition, other funds flow through the 
prescription drug supply chain. For example, the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) 
makes prospective monthly payments to Part D plan sponsors based on plan sponsors’ estimates of 
providing drug coverage to beneficiaries. These payments are reconciled by CMS at the end of the 
year to ensure that payments reflect actual drug costs minus rebates and other price concessions. 
Beneficiaries may also pay plan sponsors monthly premiums in exchange for their drug coverage. 
 
 

===PAGE 17===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 11 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
Services associated with developing and managing a prescription drug 
plan performed by PBMs, Part D plan sponsors, or both, include: 
• Formulary development. Determining the list of drugs covered under 
the plan (the formulary), including assignment of covered drugs to 
tiers that correspond to different levels of beneficiary cost sharing and 
placing restrictions on drugs included in the formulary. Part D plan 
sponsors submit formularies for their plans to CMS for review and 
approval annually. 
• Pharmacy network development. Creating a network of pharmacies 
where beneficiaries may fill their prescriptions and negotiating drug 
prices and reimbursement rates with those pharmacies. This can also 
include developing “preferred networks,” whereby beneficiaries pay 
lower cost-sharing and pharmacies agree to receive lower prices for 
drugs in exchange for increased volume of prescriptions purchased.
25 
• Utilization management services. Utilization management services 
include processes such as: 
• Prior authorization. A requirement that beneficiaries obtain 
approval for a drug by the PBM or plan sponsor before obtaining 
the drug if it is to be covered by the plan. 
• Step therapy. A requirement where more expensive drugs are 
covered only if beneficiaries try less expensive alternatives first 
and find them not to be effective. 
• Medication therapy management. A program required by CMS 
designed to improve medication adherence and reduce the risk of 
adverse drug events through discussion with targeted 
beneficiaries and prescriber intervention.26 
• Drug utilization review. A concurrent examination by the PBM or 
plan sponsor of prescriptions at the time of purchase by the 
beneficiary to assess safety considerations, such as potential 
adverse interactions, and compliance with clinical guidelines 
(including quantity and dose). These reviews can also occur 
                                                                                                                       
25See 42 C.F.R. § 423.100 (2018). 
26Beneficiaries are automatically eligible for a Part D plan sponsor’s CMS-mandated 
medication therapy management program if they meet they meet the following criteria: (1) 
have at least two chronic diseases; (2) are taking at least two Part D drugs; and (3) are 
likely to incur annual costs for covered Part D drugs greater than or equal to a specified 
cost threshold. Plan sponsors may include additional beneficiaries in their program, 
independent of these criteria. 
Prescription Drug Plan 
Services 
===PAGE 18===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 12 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
retrospectively to analyze beneficiaries’ drug utilization and 
physicians’ prescribing patterns. 
• Negotiation of rebates from manufacturers. Negotiating rebates for 
Part D plan sponsors with manufacturers in exchange for driving more 
utilization of a manufacturer’s drug. This can include more favorable 
placement on the sponsor’s formulary. The rebate terms do not have 
to be disclosed to the public, but plan sponsors must report rebate 
amounts to CMS. 
 
PBMs may earn revenue from providing drug benefit management 
services to Part D plan sponsors in a number of ways, including: (1) 
payments from plan sponsors for administering services, such as drug 
benefits claim processing; (2) retention of a portion of drug rebates that 
PBMs negotiate on behalf of the plan sponsor and fees for managing and 
distributing those rebates; (3) spread pricing; and (4) payments from 
manufacturers for various services. PBMs may provide drug benefit 
management services to Part D plan sponsors and commercial plans, 
such as employer-sponsored health plans. Commercial plans may pay 
PBMs in ways similar to Part D plans (e.g., rebate retention and claims 
processing fees). 
 
Part D plan sponsors are also required to provide access to all or 
substantially all drugs covered under certain therapeutic classes of drugs, 
known as Medicare protected classes: (1) anticonvulsants, (2) 
antidepressants, (3) antineoplastics, (4) antipsychotics, (5) antiretrovirals, 
and (6) immunosuppressants for the treatment of transplant. Plans are 
limited in the formulary restrictions they can apply to these drugs. 
Additionally, CMS generally requires Part D plan sponsors to provide 
coverage for at least two drugs in each class. 
CMS makes payments prospectively to Part D plan sponsors for 
beneficiary drug coverage. CMS pays plan sponsors monthly, and these 
payments are determined through annual bids submitted in June of the 
preceding program year, which runs from January 1 through December 
31. Those bids reflect the plan sponsors’ estimates of program costs and 
rebates and other price concessions that the sponsor expects to receive 
during the ensuing program year. At the end of the program year, CMS 
reviews cost data submitted by plan sponsors through PDE records and 
their submission of rebate and other price concession data and compares 
estimated payments with actual costs incurred, with CMS either 
reclaiming some funds or making additional payments. Thus, the final 
PBM Revenue 
Part D Coverage and 
Payments 
===PAGE 19===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 13 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
plan payments by CMS are based on the costs actually incurred by Part 
D plan sponsors minus rebates and other price concessions that are 
either passed along to the plan sponsors or retained by the PBMs.  
 
Rebates and other price concessions reduce the cost of the Part D 
program to beneficiaries and the federal government. In developing their 
bids, Part D plan sponsors may subtract rebates and other price 
concessions that are passed along to them from their estimated drug 
costs.27 When they do, rebates and other price concessions reduce a 
plan sponsor’s estimate of liability that is reflected in bid amounts, which, 
in turn, reduce beneficiary premiums because they are based, in part, on 
the bid amount. This downward pressure on premiums is one reason that 
premiums remained relatively unchanged between 2010 and 2015, 
according to CMS, even though total gross Part D drug costs grew about 
12 percent per year in that period. 
Rebates have additional implications for Part D beneficiaries and the Part 
D program more generally. Since beneficiary cost sharing is calculated 
based on the price of the drug at the time of purchase (i.e., before rebates 
are paid), beneficiaries pay higher cost sharing than they would if rebates 
were paid at the point of sale. In addition, higher pre-rebate drug prices 
may result in beneficiaries more quickly reaching the catastrophic 
coverage phase, where the federal government’s share of drug costs 
increases, and the plan sponsors’ share decreases.28 
                                                                                                                       
27Part D plan sponsor bids may be based on other factors, including estimated drug costs, 
beneficiary cost sharing, administrative expenses, and profit.  
28There are multiple phases in the Part D program that beneficiaries may pass through 
based on their cost sharing (which do not include premiums). For 2019, after a $415 
deductible is met, beneficiaries enter the initial coverage period, where enrollees cover 25 
percent of costs and plans cover 75 percent of costs until drug costs exceed $3,820, when 
enrollees reach the coverage gap. In the coverage gap (“donut hole”) phase, brand-name 
drug costs are covered by drug manufacturers (70 percent drug discounts), plan sponsors 
(5 percent), and beneficiaries (25 percent). For generic drugs, plan sponsors cover 63 
percent of costs, and beneficiaries cover 37 percent. In 2019, beneficiaries reach the 
catastrophic phase when their cost sharing reaches $5,100. The federal government then 
covers 80 percent of costs, the plan sponsor covers 15 percent, and the beneficiary 
covers 5 percent. The coverage gap will be “closed” beginning in 2020, with the 
beneficiary covering 25 percent of costs for both brand-name and generic drugs. The 
federal government pays subsidies to Part D plan sponsors that cover about 75 percent of 
the plan premium and is also responsible for payment 80 percent of costs in the 
catastrophic phase. 
Implications of Rebates 
and Other Price 
Concessions 
===PAGE 20===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 14 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
 
Seventy-four percent of the drug benefit management services provided 
under 624 Part D plan sponsor contracts were performed by a PBM alone 
or in conjunction with a Part D plan sponsor in 2016.29 We found that plan 
sponsors performed the remaining 26 percent of services themselves. In 
addition, a PBM was used to provide one or more of the 10 key drug 
benefit management services under nearly all of the 624 Part D plan 
sponsor contracts (99.7 percent), and the manner in which they used 
them varied, as summarized below: 30 
• Number of drug benefit management services provided. Part D 
plan sponsor contracts varied by the number of services provided by 
PBMs. Eighty-nine percent of Part D plan sponsor contracts used a 
PBM alone or in conjunction with a plan sponsor for at least half of the 
10 drug benefit management services; 15 percent of contracts used a 
PBM alone or with a plan sponsor for all 10 services. 
• Number of PBMs used. Part D plan sponsor contracts varied in the 
number of PBMs used to provide one or more of the 10 drug benefit 
management services. Fifty-four percent of contracts used one PBM, 
35 percent used two or three PBMs, and 11 percent used four or more 
PBMs. 
• Types of drug benefit management services provided. Part D plan 
sponsor contracts varied by the drug benefit management services 
they used a PBM to provide. PBMs alone or with the plan sponsor 
more frequently provided claims adjudication (99 percent of Part D 
plan sponsor contracts), pharmacy network development (92 percent), 
and rebate and other price concession negotiations (83 percent). In 
contrast, PBMs alone or with the plan sponsor less frequently 
provided a pharmacy and therapeutics committee (45 percent), 
                                                                                                                       
29We determined the proportion of the 10 drug benefit management services in the HPMS 
database that was provided by a PBM to the 624 Part D plan sponsor contracts included 
in our analysis. PBMs were used to perform 4,592 of the 6,240 drug benefit management 
services (74 percent) provided to the 624 contracts. We counted plan sponsor contracts 
as using a PBM to provide a drug benefit management service if the PBM provided the 
service alone or in combination with the plan. We found that that PBMs and Part D plan 
sponsors together performed 20 percent of drug benefit management services, and PBMs 
alone performed 54 percent of drug benefit management services.  
30Some of the entities used by Part D plan sponsors to provide drug benefit management 
services may have other lines of business besides PBM services. For example, Xerox, 
which provides print and digital document services, provided drug benefit management 
services such as beneficiary customer services in conjunction with a plan sponsor or PBM 
to 66 plan sponsor contracts.  
Part D Plan Sponsors 
Used a PBM to 
Provide Most Drug 
Benefit Management 
Services in 2016, and 
Use Was 
Concentrated among 
Five PBMs 
===PAGE 21===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 15 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
enrollee appeals and grievance process-management (30 percent), 
and enrollment processing (34 percent). 
 
Part D plan sponsors mainly used five PBMs in 2016. Of the 103 PBMs 
that provided at least one drug benefit management service to the 624 
Part D plan sponsor contracts in 2016, the following five provided at least 
one service to 528 (85 percent) plan sponsor contracts in 2016: CVS 
Caremark, OptumRx, Express Scripts, Medimpact, and Argus.
31 These 
five PBMs also provided the largest number of services to Part D plan 
contracts in 2016.32 For example, CVS Caremark, by itself or with another 
PBM or plan sponsor, provided 17 percent of services that PBMs 
provided to Part D plan sponsors’ contracts in 2016, the most of any 
PBM.33 
See appendix II for more information on variation in Part D plan sponsor 
contracts’ use of PBMs, factors that influence sponsors’ decision to use a 
PBM, and additional information on the PBMs used by Part D plan 
sponsors. 
 
                                                                                                                       
31For example, CVS Caremark provided at least one service to 25 percent of contracts, 
which accounted for 30 percent of total Part D enrollment.  
32The share of the PBMs’ total business that Medicare represents varied widely among 
the top five PBMs. Specifically, the PBMs told us that Part D accounted for between 1 
percent and 57 percent of the total number of individuals for whom they provide drug 
coverage. In addition, the five largest PBMs in the Part D program included in our analysis 
may vary from sources that do not focus solely only on the Medicare Part D PBM market, 
or that used a different metric of market share than number of drug benefit management 
services (e.g., number of prescription claims adjudicated by the PBM).  
33The remaining four PBMs—OptumRx, Express Scripts, MedImpact, and Argus—
provided 14 percent, 10 percent, 9 percent, and 5 percent of the drug benefit management 
services respectively. A Part D plan sponsor may use more than one PBM to provide a 
drug benefit management service. In this instance, we counted each respective PBM as 
providing the same service in our summary counts. Argus is known as DST Pharmacy 
Solutions as of September 2017. 
===PAGE 22===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 16 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
Our review of 20 service agreements between Part D plan sponsors and 
PBMs found that the primary revenue source for PBMs from services they 
provided to Part D plans was (1) a volume-based fee paid by plan 
sponsors based on the number of paid claims that the PBM processed; 
(2) a flat monthly per-member, per-month fee paid by plan sponsors; or 
(3) a combination of the two. Nineteen of the 20 service agreements that 
we reviewed stated that PBMs were to be paid in one of these ways.
34 
None of the service agreements tied these fees to the price of a drug paid 
to the pharmacy.35 Representatives we interviewed from all seven of the 
PBMs confirmed that a Part D plan sponsor-paid fee for the PBM’s 
services was the primary way they earned revenue from their Part D 
clients. 
We also examined PBM revenue reported to CMS by Part D plan 
sponsors in their rebates and other price concession data—also referred 
to as direct and indirect remuneration (DIR)—in 2016, the most recent 
data available at the time of our analysis. These data show that PBMs 
passed nearly all rebates received from manufacturers through to Part D 
plan sponsors in 2016. Part D plan sponsors reported to CMS that, of the 
approximately $18 billion in rebates that PBMs negotiated with 
pharmaceutical manufacturers that year, PBMs retained $74.3 million, or 
about 0.4 percent, and passed through the remaining 99.6 percent to plan 
sponsors.
36 
The small amount of PBM rebate retention in the Part D program was 
also reflected in the service agreements we examined and in our 
interviews with PBM representatives. Sixteen of the 20 service 
agreements that we reviewed included provisions that required the PBM 
to pass through all rebates to the Part D plan sponsor; one other 
agreement required at least 95 percent to be passed through to the plan 
                                                                                                                       
34The provisions in the remaining service agreement that we reviewed did not include 
such specific information on how the PBM was to be paid.  
35While some service agreements detailed the amount of the fees for the various services 
that the PBM would provide, it is not possible to tell from the agreements how much 
revenue those services generated for the PBM because no agreement provided the 
volume of business for any service.  
36PBMs negotiated $18 billion of the $26.7 billion in rebates that were negotiated on 
behalf of Part D plan sponsors. Plan sponsors negotiated $7.3 billion in rebates. We were 
unable to determine the entity responsible for negotiating the remaining $1.3 billion in 
rebates as we could not determine whether the PBM or plan sponsor negotiated rebates 
for certain Part D plan sponsor contracts.  
PBMs Primarily 
Earned Part D 
Revenue through 
Fees Paid by Plan 
Sponsors, Not 
Rebate Retention, 
and Reported That 
This Differed from 
PBMs’ Commercial 
Plan Revenue 
===PAGE 23===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 17 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
sponsor. The other three service agreements that we reviewed either did 
not include provisions related to rebate retention or redacted such 
information. Officials we interviewed from four of the seven PBMs told us 
their PBMs passed through to Part D plan sponsors all rebates obtained 
from manufacturers. Representatives of one PBM noted that plan 
sponsors, in turn, may use rebates to help offset the growth in drug costs, 
helping lower premiums for beneficiaries. Representatives from the other 
three PBMs noted that the amount of retained rebates was relatively 
small, consistent with the data reported to CMS. 
PBMs and Part D plan sponsors may earn non-rebate revenue from 
manufacturers for providing certain services. The service agreements we 
examined included examples of this revenue, including fees for rebate 
program administration, prescriber education programs, and programs 
designed to ensure patients adhere to, and comply with, 
recommendations regarding a particular prescription.
37 The full amount 
that PBMs and Part D plan sponsors earned from manufacturers for non-
rebate services in 2016 was $516.5 million. Although CMS requires these 
fees to be reported to the agency by plan sponsors, CMS does not break 
out how much of the money was received by PBMs and how much was 
received by plan sponsors. 
PBMs earned little Part D revenue from spread pricing—keeping the 
difference between the amount the PBM paid the pharmacy for a drug 
and the amount the PBM charged the plan for the drug, from 2014 
through 2016. PBMs earned about $300,000 from spread pricing in 2016, 
according to CMS rebate and other price concession data. CMS data also 
show that PBMs earned no revenue from spread pricing in either 2014 or 
2015. PBMs generally earn more from spread pricing and rebate retention 
from commercial plans than they do from Part D, according to officials 
from three PBMs. Officials from two of these PBMs said CMS reporting 
requirements have removed much of the incentive in Part D for PBMs to 
earn revenue from spread pricing because of the complexity of the 
requirements and the criticism from health care providers when reports to 
CMS containing these amounts are publicized. 
See appendix III for more information on Part D plan sponsor reporting to 
CMS of the amounts of revenue—other than rebates and discounts—that 
                                                                                                                       
37We were unable to determine the amount of revenue that PBMs obtained from these 
services because the volume of usage of services was not contained in any service 
agreements.   
===PAGE 24===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 18 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
manufacturers provide to their PBMs; and on PBM and Part D plan 
sponsor perspectives on PBM revenue earned from spread pricing, the 
effect of CMS requirements on spread pricing revenue, and differences 
between PBMs’ Part D and commercial business lines. 
 
Growth in the amount of rebates and other price concessions provided by 
manufacturers and others to Part D plan sponsors and PBMs outpaced 
growth in gross and net Part D expenditures for all brand-name and 
generic drugs from 2014 through 2016. Gross expenditures reflect what 
was paid to the pharmacy by the Part D plan sponsor—or the PBM on the 
sponsor’s behalf—and by the beneficiary for a given drug. Net 
expenditures reflect any rebates and discounts obtained by plan sponsors 
and PBMs after a beneficiary receives a drug. During this time, gross Part 
D expenditures increased 20 percent, from $120.7 billion in 2014 to 
$145.1 billion in 2016. The amount of rebates and other price 
concessions obtained for these drugs increased 66 percent during the 
same period, from $17.5 billion to $29 billion. As a result, rebates and 
other price concessions as a proportion of gross expenditures increased 
from 14 percent of gross expenditures in 2014 to 20 percent in 2016. This 
resulted in an increase in net Part D expenditures of 13 percent, from 
$103.2 billion in 2014 to $116.1 billion in 2016 (see fig. 2). 
Rebates and Other 
Price Concessions 
Grew Faster Than 
Part D Expenditures 
from 2014 through 
2016 
===PAGE 25===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 19 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
Figure 2: Gross Medicare Part D Expenditures, Net Part D Expenditures, Rebates 
and Other Price Concessions for All Part D Drugs, 2014-2016 (in billions of dollars) 
 
Notes: We used CMS data to analyze brand-name and generic drug expenditures for Part D 
contracts from 2014 through 2016. We excluded expenditures from contracts that participated in the 
Medicare Program of All-Inclusive Care because they are exempted from Part D requirements, such 
as charging beneficiaries cost-sharing. We also excluded expenditures for compounded drugs which 
are tailor-made by a pharmacy for a beneficiary and over-the-counter drugs as they are generally not 
covered by Medicare Part D. 
Gross expenditures reflect what was paid to the pharmacy by the Part D plan sponsor, pharmacy 
benefit managers on the sponsor’s behalf, and the beneficiary for a given drug. Net expenditures 
reflect any rebates and other price concessions obtained by plan sponsors and PBMs after a 
beneficiary receives a drug as reported in the direct and indirect remuneration data. 
 
Rebates accounted for most of the total of rebates and other price 
concessions obtained for Part D drugs from 2014 through 2016. Rebates 
are generally paid by manufacturers to Part D plan sponsors, or PBMs on 
sponsors’ behalf, after a drug is purchased from a pharmacy. In 2016, 
rebates accounted for 92 percent ($27 billion) of the $29.1 billion in 
rebates and other price concessions. The proportion was generally 
consistent in 2014 and 2015, with rebates accounting for 93 and 91 
percent of total rebates and other price concessions, respectively. 

===PAGE 26===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 20 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
Pharmacy-related price concessions, which include any monies obtained 
by plan sponsors and PBMs from a pharmacy after a beneficiary 
purchases a drug, accounted for nearly all the rest of rebates and other 
price concessions—7 percent—in 2016.38 The amount of pharmacy-
related price concessions increased 295 percent from 2014 through 2016 
($538 million to $2.1 billion). 
The 444 highest expenditure, highest utilization brand-name drugs 
accounted for the majority of expenditures and received the vast majority 
of rebates and other price concessions in 2016. These drugs accounted 
for 65 percent of the $145 billion in Part D expenditures and received 90 
percent of the $29.1 billion in rebates and other price concessions 
obtained for Part D drugs.
39 Of the 444 highest expenditure, highest 
utilization brand-name drugs in 2016, the 200 highest utilization and the 
200 highest expenditure drugs received a greater amount of rebates and 
other price concessions than the 200 highest expenditure per utilization 
drugs. 40 (See table 1.) Furthermore we found that brand-name drugs 
received greater amounts of rebates and other price concessions than 
generic drugs.
41 Specifically, among the 444 highest expenditure, highest 
                                                                                                                       
38According to CMS, pharmacy-related price concessions includes payments to and from 
pharmacies that affect the net price of the drug purchased by the Part D plan sponsor 
after the point-of-sale. These include reconciling any differences between the contracted 
payment rate by the PBM or Part D plan sponsor to the pharmacy and the rate paid to the 
pharmacy at the point-of-sale. They also include bonuses paid by the plan sponsor or 
PBM to the pharmacy or fees paid by the pharmacy to the plan sponsor or PBM based on 
how well the pharmacy met certain agreed upon performance metrics, such as the generic 
dispensing rate. In 2016, payments from pharmacies to plan sponsors totaled $2.3 billion 
and payments from plan sponsors to pharmacies totaled $211 million. The net of these 
payments—$2.1 billion—is reported as pharmacy-related price concessions.  
39We analyzed Part D expenditure and rebate and other price concessions data from the 
prescription drug event and DIR data sets for three groups of brand-name drugs: the 200 
drugs with the highest expenditures, the 200 drugs with the highest utilization, and the 200 
drugs with the highest expenditures per utilization. This resulted in a group of 444 unique 
brand-name drugs across the three groups. We focused our analysis on brand-name 
drugs, as they received the majority of rebates and other price concessions in 2016.  
40There was a strong correlation between the amount of rebates and other price 
concessions with expenditures (correlation coefficient of 0.91) and utilization (correlation 
coefficient of 0.74) for the 444 highest expenditure, highest utilization brand-name drugs. 
The correlation coefficient is a statistical measure of association, ranging in value from 
negative 1 to positive 1, with negative 1 indicating a perfect negative correlation, 0 an 
absence of correlation, and positive 1 a perfect positive correlation.  
41Rebates are used more frequently for drugs where there is competition and for which 
there are therapeutic substitutes and are rarely available for generic drugs. See G. 
Dieguez, M. Alston, and S. Tomicki, A Primer on Prescription Drug Rebates: Insights Into 
Why Rebates Are A Target For Reducing Prices (Milliman, Inc. May 2018). 
===PAGE 27===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 21 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
utilization brand-name drugs and the 476 highest expenditure, highest 
utilization generic drugs, brand-name drugs received 98 percent of 
rebates and other price concessions in 2016. 
Table 1: Rebates and Other Price Concessions and Expenditures for the Highest Expenditure, Highest Utilization Brand-Name 
Medicare Part D Drugs, 2016  
Brand-Name Drug 
category 
Gross Part D 
expenditures  
(billions of dollars) 
Rebates and other 
price concessions 
(billions of dollars) 
Net expenditures 
(billions of dollars) 
Rebates and 
other price 
concessions as 
a proportion of 
gross 
expenditures 
(percent) 
Median number 
of beneficiaries 
receiving each 
drug  
200 Highest-expenditure  85.3 24.6 60.7 29 52,847 
200 Highest-utilization  62.7 22.6 40.1 36 95,852 
200 Highest-expenditure 
per utilization  
20.3 2.3 17.9 12 301 
Source: GAO analysis of Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) data. I GAO-19-498 
Note: We analyzed CMS Part D expenditure and rebate and other price concession data from the 
prescription drug event and direct and indirect remuneration data sets for three groups of brand-name 
drugs: the 200 drugs with the highest expenditures, the 200 drugs with the highest utilization, and the 
200 drugs with the highest expenditures per utilization. We identified drugs that had common 
ingredients, strengths, dose, and route of administration and combined them. This resulted in a group 
of 444 unique brand-name drugs across the three groups. 
Gross expenditures reflect what was paid to the pharmacy by the Part D plan sponsor, pharmacy 
benefit managers on the sponsor’s behalf, and the beneficiary for a given drug. Net expenditures 
reflect any rebates and discounts obtained by plan sponsors and PBMS after a beneficiary receives a 
drug. 
 
Consistent with the results for all Part D drugs, from 2014 through 2016 
rebates and other price concessions outpaced growth in gross and net 
expenditures for the three groups of highest expenditure, highest 
utilization brand-name drugs in our analysis (see table 2 for information 
on these brand-name drugs). The three groups of brand-name drugs 
generally had higher percent changes in rebates and other prices 
concessions and in gross and net expenditures than did all Part D drugs, 
which includes generics. For example, from 2014 through 2016, net 
expenditures for the 200 highest expenditure brand-name drugs 
increased 27 percent compared to a 13 percent increase for all Part D 
drugs. Of the three groups, the 200 drugs with the highest expenditure 
per utilization had the largest percentage increases in expenditures and 
rebates and other price concessions. However, these drugs had relatively 
===PAGE 28===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 22 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
low gross expenditures, rebates and other price concessions, and 
utilization compared with the other two groups.42 Increases in 
expenditures for the three groups of drugs in our analysis were primarily 
accounted for by increases in the price per drug rather than changes in 
utilization, as indicated by the growth in expenditures exceeded growth in 
their utilization. 
Table 2: Percentage Change in Rebates and Other Price Concessions and Expenditures for the Highest Expenditure,  Highest 
Utilization Brand-Name Medicare Part D Drugs, 2014-2016 
 Median percentage growth, 2014-2016 
Drug group Gross expenditures 
 (percent) 
Rebates and other 
price concessions 
(percent) 
Net expenditures 
(percent) 
Utilization  
(percent) 
200 Highest-expenditure  38 92 27 1 
200 Highest-utilization  29 61 13 -1 
200 Highest-expenditure per 
utilization  
61 302 59 24 
Source: GAO analysis of Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) data. | GAO-19-498 
Notes: We analyzed CMS expenditure and rebate and other price concession information, known as 
direct and indirect remuneration, for the following groups of brand-name drugs: the 200 with the 
highest expenditures, the 200 with the highest utilization, and the 200 with the highest expenditures 
per utilization. We identified drugs that had common ingredients, strengths, dose, and route of 
administration and combined them. This resulted in a group of 444 unique brand-name drugs across 
the three groups. 
Gross expenditures reflect what was paid to the pharmacy by both the Part D plan sponsor, 
pharmacy benefit managers on the sponsor’s behalf, and the beneficiary for a given drug. Net 
expenditures reflect any rebates and other price concessions obtained by plan sponsors and PBMS 
after a beneficiary receives a drug. 
 
Net expenditures per beneficiary were similar if a Part D plan sponsor 
used a PBM for rebate negotiations or if it conducted its own negotiations. 
Specifically, in 2016, median net expenditures per enrollee were similar 
for plan sponsors using a PBM and those that did not at $2,557 and 
$2,570, respectively. Rebates and other price concessions accounted for 
a median of 12 percent of gross Part D expenditures for plan sponsors 
using a PBM for their negotiations and a median of 10 percent for plan 
                                                                                                                       
42The highest expenditure per utilization drugs had a median of 300 beneficiaries 
receiving them in 2016, compared to a median of 53,000 and 96,000 beneficiaries for the 
highest expenditure drugs and the highest utilization drugs, respectively. 
===PAGE 29===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 23 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
sponsors that did not.43 The majority—82 percent—of plan sponsors used 
a PBM to obtain rebates and other price concessions on their behalf.44 
The plan sponsors that performed their own negotiations generally had 
higher enrollment than those that used a PBM—a median of 
approximately 47,000 beneficiaries, compared to approximately 13,000 
beneficiaries (see table 3). 
Table 3: Rebates and Other Price Concessions Received by Medicare Part D Plan Sponsors That Used a Pharmacy Benefit 
Manager (PBM) for Rebate Negotiations and Those That Did Not, 2016 
  Part D plan sponsors 
Number of Part D 
sponsorsa 
Median Part D 
sponsor enrollment  
Rebates and other price 
concessions as 
percentage of gross 
Part D expenditures 
(median) 
Median gross 
Part D 
expenditures 
per enrollee 
(dollars) 
Median net 
Part D 
expenditures 
per enrollee 
(dollars) 
PBM-performed 177 12,526  12  3,042  2,557  
Plan-performed 20 46,860  10  3,031  2,570  
Source: GAO analysis of Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) data. I GAO-19-498 
Note: We analyzed CMS Part D expenditure and rebate and other price concessions from the 
prescription drug event and direct and indirect remuneration data for 2016 to determine the amount of 
rebates and other price concessions relative to gross expenditures, which reflect the amount paid to 
the pharmacy by the Part D plan sponsor, PBMs on the sponsor’s behalf, and the beneficiary for a 
given drug. Net expenditures reflect any rebates and discounts obtained by plan sponsors and PBMs 
after a beneficiary receives a drug. 
a
Excluded are 20 Part D plan sponsors for which we were unable to determine the entity performing 
their rebate and price concession negotiations. 
 
See appendix IV for additional information on expenditures and rebates 
and other price concessions obtained for the 444 highest expenditure, 
highest utilization brand-name Part D drugs in 2016. The appendix also 
contains information on expenditures and rebates and other price 
concessions obtained by the Part D plan sponsors whose representatives 
we interviewed. 
                                                                                                                       
43Of the 217 Part D plan sponsors, 177 plan sponsors, accounting for 54 percent of Part D 
enrollment in 2016, used a PBM to conduct their rebate and price concession 
negotiations. Twenty plan sponsors, accounting for 39 percent of enrollment, performed 
their own rebate and price concession negotiations. The remaining 20 sponsors, for which 
we could not determine the entity conducting the negotiations, accounted for 7 percent of 
the enrollment. 
44This calculation reflects PBM use by plan sponsors. Each sponsor may have more than 
one contract that offers Part D coverage. Our analysis of plan sponsor use of PBMs for 
their individual Part D found that 82 percent of contracts used a PBM, either alone or in 
conjunction with the plan sponsor, for rebate and price concession negotiations. 
===PAGE 30===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 24 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
 
In 2016, the highest expenditure, highest utilization brand-name drugs 
sold in retail pharmacies received discounts off of manufacturer list prices 
that were significantly higher than those sold in specialty pharmacies.45 Of 
the 444 highest expenditure, highest utilization brand-drugs in our 
analysis, 244 were sold in retail pharmacies. For this group, gross Part D 
prices—those paid to the pharmacy by the Part D plan sponsor, PBMs on 
the sponsor’s behalf, and the beneficiary—were 17 percent lower than 
manufacturer list prices for these drugs. When rebates and other price 
concessions were accounted for, net Part D prices were 41 percent lower 
than manufacturer list prices.
46 In contrast, the 200 drugs sold in specialty 
pharmacies received fewer discounts off of manufacturer list prices. For 
these drugs, median gross and net prices were 15 percent and 16 
percent, respectively, lower than manufacturer list prices (see fig. 3).47 As 
a result, drugs sold in retail pharmacies received median discounts (41 
percent) that were 2.5 times larger than those sold in specialty 
pharmacies (16 percent). 
                                                                                                                       
45We separated drugs sold in retail community pharmacies from those sold in specialty 
pharmacies, as the latter dispense low-volume and high-cost drugs to patients undergoing 
intensive therapies for illnesses. 
46Pharmacy acquisition cost, which reflects the price pharmacies paid to obtain the drug, 
was 19 percent lower than manufacturer list prices for drugs sold in retail pharmacies. 
47Of the 200 brand-name drugs sold in specialty pharmacies, 187 were among the 200 
Part D drugs with the highest expenditure per utilization Part D drugs in 2016. As noted 
earlier, these drugs had lower utilization and received fewer rebates than drugs with 
higher utilization and higher expenditures. 
Part D Drug Prices 
Were Significantly 
Lower Than List 
Prices for Brand-
Name Drugs in Retail 
Pharmacies; Drugs 
Sold in Specialty 
Pharmacies Received 
Fewer Discounts 
===PAGE 31===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 25 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
Figure 3: Medicare Part D Median Drug Prices as a Percentage of Manufacturer List 
Prices for Highest Expenditure and Highest Utilization Brand-Name Drugs, 2016 
 
Notes: Brand-name drugs sold in retail pharmacies had a gross median per unit price of $11.75, while 
the gross median per unit price for brand-name drugs sold in specialty pharmacies was $315.54. 
Prices are the 2016 median per unit prices for the brand-name drugs that met the following criteria: 
the 200 drugs with the highest expenditures, the 200 drugs with the highest utilization, and the 200 
drugs with the highest expenditures per utilization. We identified drugs that had common ingredients, 
strengths, dose, and routes of administration. This resulted in a group of 444 unique brand-name 
drugs across the three groups because some drugs met multiple criteria and therefore appeared in 
more than one group. Of these 444 brand-name drugs, 244 were drugs sold in retail pharmacies, and 
200 were drugs sold in specialty pharmacies. 
Manufacturer list price is the median average wholesale price. Pharmacy acquisition cost reflects 
prices reported in surveys of community retail pharmacies in the National Average Drug Acquisition 
Cost data set. Gross Part D prices reflect median unit prices paid to pharmacies by Part D plan 
sponsors, pharmacy benefit managers on the sponsor’s behalf, and the beneficiary and net Part D 
prices account for rebates and other price concessions obtained by plan sponsors for these drugs. 
a
Pharmacy acquisition cost data are unavailable for drugs sold in specialty pharmacies, as these 
pharmacies are not surveyed by CMS. 
 
 

===PAGE 32===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 26 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
See appendix V for more information on prices for the highest 
expenditure, highest utilization brand-name drugs and for information on 
prices for selected generic drugs. 
 
Our review of 52 peer-reviewed studies indicates that utilization 
management services were associated with financial savings or improved 
beneficiary health indicators. However, the effects on ensuring that 
beneficiaries take their medication as prescribed (adherence) and access 
to clinically appropriate prescriptions were less clear.48 The studies 
examined the effects of 10 different types of utilization management 
services in three areas: (1) financial savings; (2) beneficiary health 
indicators; and (3) beneficiary medication adherence and access:49 
• Financial savings. Twenty-seven of the 36 studies we reviewed that 
examined financial savings found that utilization management 
services were associated with savings for the Medicare program, Part 
D plans, or beneficiaries. For example, all eight studies that examined 
the relationship between generic substitution and financial savings 
found savings.50 Of the 10 studies that did not find financial savings, 
five found no statistically significant impact of the utilization 
management service on savings, three found the utilization 
management service was associated with a decrease in savings, and 
two found both an increase and decrease in savings for different types 
of utilization management services. 
• Beneficiary health indicators. Twelve of the 20 studies that 
examined beneficiary health indicators found that utilization 
management services were associated with improvement, such as a 
reduction in adverse drug events. Ten of the 12 studies that found 
improvement examined either medication therapy management 
programs or comprehensive medication reviews. The other two 
studies that found improvement looked at drug utilization reviews, 
which examine a beneficiary’s prescriptions to identify safety 
considerations, such as potential adverse interactions with other 
                                                                                                                       
48The studies used a range of health indicators, such as appropriateness of medications 
for older adults, cholesterol values, and reductions in adverse drug events. 
49Some studies examined the effect of utilization management services on more than one 
outcome. For example, one study examined both step therapy and prior authorization. 
50Generic substitution is switching a generic drug for its bioequivalent, brand-name 
counterpart. 
Utilization 
Management Was 
Generally Associated 
with Financial 
Savings and 
Improved Health 
Indicators, but Its 
Effect on Medication 
Adherence and 
Access Was Less 
Clear 
===PAGE 33===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 27 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
drugs and compliance with clinical guidelines.51 Of the eight studies 
that found no improvement, one found that a health indicator 
worsened, and four found improvement in at least one health indicator 
and a decline in at least one other indicator. 
• Beneficiary medication adherence and access. Of the 15 studies 
that examined the effect of utilization management services on 
beneficiaries’ medication adherence or access to clinically appropriate 
drugs, 10 examined medication therapy management programs or 
comprehensive medication reviews. Seven of these 10 found 
improvement in medication adherence.
52 In contrast, the other five 
studies that examined adherence and access found negative, mixed, 
or no effects associated with prior authorization and step therapy. For 
example, two studies examined the effect of prior authorization and 
step therapy and found that these utilization management services 
resulted in increased access problems. Two other studies examined 
the relationship of prior authorization and step therapy adherence and 
found a mixed impact. The remaining study examined the relationship 
of only prior authorization with the time needed to access medications 
and found no clinically significant impact. 
 
Stakeholders we interviewed generally agreed that utilization 
management services resulted in financial savings but differed in their 
views regarding the effect of utilization management services on 
beneficiaries’ medication adherence and access to clinically appropriate 
drugs. In interviews with representatives from PBMs, Part D plan 
sponsors, and a manufacturer trade association, these stakeholders 
generally agreed that utilization management services resulted in 
financial savings. While representatives from most Part D plan sponsors 
and PBMs told us that utilization management services have resulted in 
no adverse impact on medication adherence and access to prescriptions, 
representatives of the three drug manufacturers we interviewed told us 
that utilization management services limit medication adherence and 
access to medications by, for example, delaying therapy to needed drugs. 
                                                                                                                       
51A comprehensive medical review, which can be part of a medication therapy 
management program, is a systematic process of assessing medications to identify 
problems, such as a change in a drug’s effect when taken with another drug, and creating 
a plan to resolve them. 
52 The remaining three studies found that the utilization management service had no 
statistically significant impact on adherence. 
===PAGE 34===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 28 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
See appendix VI for more information about the effects of utilization 
management services from the peer-reviewed studies we examined and 
the stakeholders we interviewed. See appendix VII for the articles 
included in our literature review. 
 
The Department of Health and Human Services provided technical 
comments on a draft copy of this report, which GAO incorporated as 
appropriate. 
 
As agreed with your offices, unless you publicly announce the contents of 
this report earlier, we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the 
report date. At that time, we will send copies of this report to the 
appropriate congressional committees and the Secretary of Health and 
Human Services. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on 
the GAO website at http://www.gao.gov. 
If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact 
me at (202) 512-7114 or dickenj@dickenj@gao.gov.gov. Contact points 
for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be 
found on the last page of this report. GAO staff who made major 
contributions to this report are listed in appendix VIII. 
 
John E. Dicken 
Director, Health Care 
Agency Comments 
 
===PAGE 35===
 
Appendix I: Objectives, Scope, and 
Methodology 
 
 
 
 
Page 29 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
This appendix provides details on our scope and methodology in 
addressing each of our five reporting objectives: (1) the extent to which 
Part D plan sponsors contract with pharmacy benefit managers (PBM) to 
deliver drug benefit management services to Medicare beneficiaries; (2) 
how PBMs earn revenue from the services they provide to Part D plan 
sponsors; (3) trends in rebates and other price concessions obtained by 
Part D plan sponsors and PBMs from manufacturers and others for Part 
D drugs; (4) the extent to which prices for Part D drugs are discounted off 
of manufacturer list prices; and (5) what is known about savings and other 
effects from utilization management services commonly used in Part D. In 
addition, the appendix describes the steps we took to assure the reliability 
of the data we analyzed. 
 
For all our objectives, we obtained the perspectives of stakeholders on 
Part D plan sponsors’ use of PBMs as well as information on sponsors’ 
efforts to control Part D expenditures and drug utilization. We spoke to 
representatives from 17 small, mid-sized, and large Part D plan sponsors: 
Aetna, Anthem, Banner Health, Cambia Health, Cigna, CVS, Express 
Scripts, Kaiser, Health Care Service Corp, Health Plan of San Mateo, 
Henry Ford Health System, Humana, Missouri Highways and 
Transportation Commission, Rite Aid, United Health Care, University of 
Pittsburgh Medical Center, and WellCare.
1 We spoke with seven PBMs: 
Argus, CVS Caremark, EnvisionRx, Express Scripts, MedImpact, Prime 
Therapeutics, and OptumRx.2 To obtain other drug industry perspectives, 
we spoke with representatives from three drug manufacturers: Eli Lilly, 
Gilead, and Amgen. We also spoke with one entity that is both a 
wholesaler and pharmacy services administrative organization: 
AmerisourceBergen. Additionally, we spoke with other industry and 
advocacy organizations, including groups representing drug 
                                                                                                                       
1The 17 Part D plan sponsors consisted of 11 sponsors that had the 20 contracts with the 
largest enrollment in 2016 (enrollment in these contracts accounted for 82 percent of Part 
D enrollment in 2016); three plan sponsors that had contracts with enrollment at or just 
below the median 2016 contract enrollment; and three plan sponsors that had three 
contracts with enrollment at or below the bottom enrollment quartile. In this report, we 
refer to a drug plan or plans covered under each sponsor contract with the Centers for 
Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) as a “Part D plan sponsor contract.” 
2Argus is known as DST Pharmacy Solutions as of September 2017. We spoke with 
representatives from the six PBMs that provided the most drug benefit management 
services to Part D plan sponsors in 2016 as identified by our analysis of HPMS data. We 
also judgmentally selected an additional PBM that provided the eighth most drug benefit 
management services to Part D plan sponsors. 
Appendix I: Objectives, Scope, and 
Methodology 
Interviews 
===PAGE 36===
 
Appendix I: Objectives, Scope, and 
Methodology 
 
 
 
 
Page 30 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
manufacturers, Part D plan sponsors, pharmacies, and PBMs: America’s 
Health Insurance Plans, Biotechnology Innovation Organization, 
Community Oncology Alliance, National Association of Chain Drug 
Stores, National Association of Specialty Pharmacies, National 
Community Pharmacists Association, Patients for Affordable Drugs, 
Pharmacy Benefit Management Institute, Pharmaceutical Care 
Management Association, and Pharmaceutical Research and 
Manufacturers of America. 
 
To determine the extent to which PBMs provided services to Part D plan 
sponsors, we analyzed the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services’ 
(CMS) Health Plan Management System (HPMS) data that identified the 
entity or entities responsible for performing each of 10 key drug benefit 
management services for plan sponsors’ Part D contracts in 2016, the 
most recent available expenditure and rebate and other price concession 
data at the time of our analysis.3 CMS provided HPMS data for the 624 
Part D plan sponsor contracts that were effective in 2016.4 The data 
contained the entity or entities reported by each plan sponsor as 
performing each service. Using this information, we identified for each 
contract whether the plan sponsor performed a service itself; contracted 
with a PBM to perform the service; or performed the service in 
coordination with a PBM. For a given contract, we counted as being a 
PBM any entity that was not the plan sponsor that performed one or more 
drug benefit management services. We manually reviewed those PBMs 
against a list of PBM members from a PBM trade organization. We used 
                                                                                                                       
3HPMS is the communication portal through which Part D plan sponsors report 
information to CMS. According to CMS, Part D plan sponsors are required to report the 
entities responsible for performing these 10 drug benefit management services on an 
ongoing basis: claims adjudication, rebate and other price concession negotiations, 
pharmacy network development, enrollment processing, enrollee appeals and grievance 
process-management, customer service, management of a pharmacy and therapeutics 
committee, coordination with drug benefit programs, pharmacy technical assistance, and 
drug benefit administration. 
4Plan sponsors contract with CMS to provide Part D coverage through individual contracts 
that each offer one or more unique drug plans. Part D coverage is offered through 
contracts providing stand-alone Part D prescription drug plans (PDPs) that supplement 
traditional Medicare or through Medicare Advantage (Part C) plans that cover all Medicare 
benefits, including Part D drug coverage. CMS provided us with HPMS data for all PDP 
and Part C plan sponsor contracts. They excluded Program of All-inclusive Care for the 
Elderly (PACE) Part D plans, as they are exempted from Part D requirements, such as 
charging beneficiaries cost-sharing. These 624 contracts provided 4,663 unique plans and 
were operated by 207 Part D plan sponsors in June 2016.  
The Extent to Which Part 
D Plan Sponsors Contract 
with PBMs to Deliver Drug 
Benefit Management 
Services to Beneficiaries 
===PAGE 37===
 
Appendix I: Objectives, Scope, and 
Methodology 
 
 
 
 
Page 31 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
internet searches to confirm the entity was not the plan sponsor in 
instances when it was not listed in the trade organization’s member 
directory. In doing so, we also identified whether the plan sponsor shared 
common ownership with the PBM responsible for providing the drug 
benefit management service. For example, there were instances where 
the plan sponsor and PBM were sister organizations owned by the same 
parent company. In this situation, we counted the PBM as a separate 
entity from the plan. 
In addition, we analyzed PBM use by plan sponsor contract enrollment 
size using CMS contract enrollment information from June 2016.
5 
Additionally, we used HPMS data to examine plan sponsor contracts’ 
variation in the number of PBMs used, the types of services that PBMs 
provided, and the use of PBMs by contract enrollment size. We also 
identified the PBMs that provided the most services and described the 
services they provided. Last, we interviewed Part D plan sponsor 
representatives to understand the considerations that influenced their 
decision about how and whether to use a PBM. 
 
To determine how PBMs earned revenue from services they provide to 
Part D plan sponsors, we relied on four information sources. First, we 
reviewed selected service agreements between PBMs and Part D plan 
sponsors. The service agreements generally contain detailed information 
on the services that the PBM will provide, how the plan sponsor will pay 
the PBM for those services, and the rates that pharmacies will be paid for 
Part D drugs. We asked CMS for a list of all service agreements it 
approved between January 2016 and May 2018 that were in effect as of 
June 2018. CMS provided us with a list of 119 service agreements. Using 
June 2018 Part D publicly available enrollment data from CMS, we 
obtained from CMS the 20 service agreements for Part D plans sponsors 
with the largest enrollment in June 2018. While most of the service 
agreements included sufficient information to determine how the PBMs 
were paid, some did not, and, where appropriate, we noted these 
instances in our findings. 
Second, we examined PBM revenue reported to CMS by Part D plan 
sponsors in their rebates and other price concession data—also referred 
                                                                                                                       
5We used June 2016 data to indicate enrollment, as this month has relatively stable 
enrollment as it does not fall within the annual open enrollment period where beneficiaries 
may change their Part D coverage. 
How PBMs Earn Revenue 
from the Services They 
Provide to Part D Plan 
Sponsors 
===PAGE 38===
 
Appendix I: Objectives, Scope, and 
Methodology 
 
 
 
 
Page 32 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
to as direct and indirect remuneration (DIR)—for 2014, 2015, and 2016. 
These rebate and other price concession submissions contain information 
on the various sources of revenue and expenses incurred by PBMs and 
plan sponsors.6 
Third, we reviewed applicable CMS regulations and guidance on the 
reporting of PBM and Part D plan sponsor revenue and expenses. 
Fourth, we interviewed PBM representatives about the extent to which 
PBMs retained rebates or passed them through to plan sponsors and, in 
some cases, the reasons for this decision. We also asked certain PBM 
representatives whether their revenue sources for Part D, specifically 
rebate retention and spread pricing, differed from PBMs’ and plan 
sponsors’ commercial business and, if so, the reasons for any 
differences. 
 
To examine rebates and other price concessions obtained by Part D plan 
sponsors and PBMs from manufacturers and others for Part D drugs, 
relative to overall Part D expenditures, we analyzed plan sponsors’ gross 
and net expenditures for Part D drugs for 2014 through 2016, the most 
recent data available at the time of our analysis. Gross expenditures 
reflect what was paid to the pharmacy by the plan sponsor, PBMs on the 
sponsor’s behalf, and the beneficiary for a given drug. Net expenditures 
reflect any rebates and other price concessions obtained by Part D plan 
sponsors and PBMs after a beneficiary receives a drug. To calculate 
gross expenditures, we used Medicare prescription drug event (PDE) 
data to calculate gross brand-name and generic drug expenditure and 
utilization information for all Part D plan sponsors’ contracts.
7 We used 
                                                                                                                       
6We reviewed Part D plan-sponsor-filed DIR data, which contains information on rebates 
and other price concessions, along with additional breakdowns of other revenue sources, 
including monies retained by PBMs for non-rebate services they provided to 
manufacturers and spread pricing—the difference between what the PBM paid the 
pharmacy and charged the Part D plan sponsor for a drug.  
7Part D plan sponsors—both PDPs and Medicare Advantage drug plans—must submit a 
PDE record to CMS each time a beneficiary obtains a prescription drug. The PDE record 
contains information on the beneficiary receiving the drug, the price paid by the plan 
sponsor to the pharmacy, and applicable beneficiary cost-sharing. We excluded PDE 
claims billed under PACE contracts because they are exempted from certain Part D 
requirements, such as charging beneficiaries cost-sharing. We also excluded 
compounded drugs, which are tailor-made by a pharmacy for a beneficiary, and over-the-
counter drugs as they are generally not covered by Medicare Part D.  
Rebates and Other Price 
Concessions Obtained by 
Part D Plan Sponsors and 
PBMs from Manufacturers 
and Others for Part D 
Drugs 
===PAGE 39===
 
Appendix I: Objectives, Scope, and 
Methodology 
 
 
 
 
Page 33 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
Red Book, a compendium published by Truven Health Analytics, to 
determine whether drugs were brand-name or generic.8 We then 
identified individual brand-name and generic drugs by grouping 
expenditure claims with the same active ingredient, strength, dosage 
form, and route of administration (known as ISDR).9 We calculated brand-
name and generic drug expenditures based on a drug’s ingredient cost, 
dispensing fees, sales tax, and applicable vaccine administration fees. 
We used PDE data to calculate gross expenditures for all Part D plan 
sponsors at both the contract and plan sponsor level.10 We used DIR data 
to determine the amount of rebates and other price concessions and 
subtracted this amount from this data to calculate net expenditures.11 We 
also obtained plan sponsor enrollment data using publicly available CMS 
data for June 2016, which allowed us to calculate gross per beneficiary 
expenditures.12 
We also examined differences in the amount of rebate and other price 
concessions obtained relative to expenditures for Part D plan sponsors 
that used a PBM relative to those that did not. We determined PBM 
involvement in rebate and other price concession negotiations for 
individual plan sponsors using 2016 HPMS data. We specifically looked 
at each entity listed in HMPS as negotiating rebates and other price 
concessions with drug manufacturers and others. We were able to 
determine whether a PBM or plan sponsor performed this service for 197 
plans sponsors. However, there were 20 Part D plan sponsors where a 
                                                                                                                       
8Generic drugs may have more than one manufacturer, and we grouped these drugs 
together regardless of whether they were produced by more than one manufacturer.  
9The dosage form is the physical form in which a drug is produced and dispensed, such 
as a tablet or capsule; route of administration is the way of administering a drug to a 
patient, such as taking a drug orally. We used the Red Book to determine drugs’ 
therapeutic class, dose, and route of administration. 
10Part D plan sponsors may have one or more unique contracts that each offer one or 
more unique drug plans. We collapsed all sponsors’ respective contract expenditure 
information, which resulted in a list of 217 unique plan sponsors in 2016.  
11Rebates are a form of price concession paid by a drug manufacturer to the plan sponsor 
or the PBM working on the plan’s behalf generally after a drug was purchased by a 
beneficiary. Plan sponsors may receive other price concessions that lower the price of a 
drug. For example, plan sponsors may receive fees from pharmacies based on their 
performance.  
12We used June 2016 data to indicate enrollment because this month has relatively stable 
enrollment as it does not fall within an annual open enrollment period where beneficiaries 
may change their Part D coverage. 
===PAGE 40===
 
Appendix I: Objectives, Scope, and 
Methodology 
 
 
 
 
Page 34 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
PBM or plan was not solely listed as performing the rebate and other 
price concession service. In these instances, we could not identify which 
entity negotiated rebates and other price concessions and therefore 
excluded them from this analysis.13 
To obtain more information on drugs that have the greatest fiscal impact 
on the Part D program and beneficiaries, we calculated gross and net 
expenditures for the brand-name and generic drugs with the highest 
expenditures, highest utilization, and highest expenditure per utilization in 
2016. For both brand-name and generic drugs, we identified the following: 
the 200 brand-name and 200 generic drugs with the highest expenditures 
in 2016; the 200 brand-name and generic drugs with the highest 
utilization in 2016 (based on number of 30-day prescriptions); and the 200 
brand-name and generic drugs with the highest expenditures per 
utilization (i.e., highest expenditure per number of 30-day prescriptions). 
As a result of overlap in the groups of drugs, these criteria yielded two 
groups: the 444 highest expenditure, highest utilization brand-name drugs 
and the 476 unique highest expenditure, highest utilization generic drugs. 
These 920 drugs accounted for 81 percent of total Part D expenditures in 
2016.
14 We used drug-level rebate and other price concessions data to 
calculate net drug prices for these drugs by subtracting rebate and other 
price concessions for each drug from gross expenditures.15 
 
                                                                                                                       
13We excluded instances in which the plan sponsor and PBM were listed as performing 
this service together because we wanted to isolate any differences in expenditures and 
the amount of rebates and other price concessions based on whether the plan sponsor or 
PBM performed the service. This differs from our analysis of Part D plan sponsors’ use of 
PBMs in the Part D program, where we examined the extent to which PBMs were involved 
in providing these services, regardless of whether the PBM performed alone in 
conjunction with the plan sponsor.  
14Of the 920 highest expenditure, highest utilization brand-name and generic drugs, the 
444 brand-name drugs accounted for 65 percent of total drug expenditures and the 476 
generic drugs accounted for 16 percent of expenditures.  
15In addition to plan sponsor-level DIR data, Part D plan sponsors submit drug-level DIR 
data to CMS. This contains information on the amount of rebates and other price 
concessions, but does not include the additional breakdowns included in the plan sponsor-
level data (e.g., information on retained rebates).  
===PAGE 41===
 
Appendix I: Objectives, Scope, and 
Methodology 
 
 
 
 
Page 35 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
To determine the extent to which Part D drug prices are discounted off of 
manufacturer list prices, we compared the median gross and net prices 
for the 444 brand-name and 476 generic highest expenditure, highest 
utilization drugs to (1) list prices established by manufacturers, and (2) 
the cost to pharmacies of acquiring these drugs. For list prices, we used 
2016 average wholesale price (AWP) data from Truven Health Analytics’ 
Red Book.
16 AWP is a common benchmark drug price used in the 
negotiation of payment rates between Part D plan sponsors and 
pharmacies.17 Because AWP is updated on an ongoing basis, we 
calculated a day-weighted per unit price that takes into account the 
number of days that the reported price was in effect in 2016. We then 
determined the median AWP price for each drug product based on the 
ISDR.18 We refer to the median price as the manufacturer list price. 
For pharmacy acquisition costs, which reflect the price pharmacies paid 
to obtain the drug, we used retail community pharmacy acquisition cost 
data from National Average Drug Acquisition Cost (NADAC) data. 
NADAC does not contain data from non-retail pharmacies, such as mail-
order or specialty pharmacies. For our groups of 444 brand-name and 
476 generic drugs, we separated drugs sold in retail community 
pharmacies from those sold in specialty pharmacies. If a drug did not 
have pharmacy acquisition cost data from NADAC, we considered that 
drug to be sold in specialty pharmacies and, thus, a specialty drug.19 
We used 2016 PDE data to determine the gross per unit Part D price for a 
drug by dividing the gross expenditures for the drug by the total quantity 
                                                                                                                       
16We analyzed 2016 AWP data, as this was the most recent data for which both PDE and 
DIR data were available at the time of our analysis.  
17AWP is the manufacturer’s suggested price for a drug sold by a wholesaler to a 
pharmacy and does not reflect the actual price charged by a wholesaler.  
18A drug with the same proprietary name may have more than one ISDR. For example, 
Amitiza, which is lubiprostone, has separate ISDR for 8 microgram and 24 microgram 
capsules.  
19We determined whether a drug was sold in retail or specialty pharmacies based on 
NADAC data. We found that 97 percent of the 444 highest expenditure, highest utilization 
brand-name drugs that lacked NADAC were listed as specialty drugs on a Part D plan 
sponsor’s formulary. Given this, we refer to drugs that do not have a NADAC price as 
those sold in specialty pharmacies.   
The Extent to Which 
Prices for Part D Drugs 
Are Discounted Off of 
Manufacturer List Prices 
===PAGE 42===
 
Appendix I: Objectives, Scope, and 
Methodology 
 
 
 
 
Page 36 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
dispensed of it.20 For example, a drug that had 1,000 units prescribed to 
Medicare beneficiaries and $5,000 in gross expenditures would have a 
gross per unit price of $5. We determined net per unit Part D prices for 
the drugs in our two study groups by dividing the amount of rebates and 
other price concessions for each drug by the quantity dispensed of it and 
then subtracting the amount of rebates and other price concessions per 
quantity from the gross Part D price for each drug. 
For each drug, we then determined the median pharmacy acquisition cost 
(if available), median gross Part D price, and median net Part D price as a 
proportion of median manufacturer list price by dividing each price by the 
median manufacturer list price. We then reported the median value for 
these pricing points for the highest expenditure, highest utilization drugs 
in our analysis. 
 
To determine what is known about the impact of utilization management 
services that PBMs commonly provide to Part D plan sponsors, or that 
plan sponsors may perform themselves, we conducted a literature search 
for studies that examined the effect of utilization management services in 
Part D (regardless of whether they were provided by a PBM or another 
entity) on the following outcomes: (1) financial costs or savings, (2) 
beneficiaries’ health indicators, and (3) beneficiaries’ access to clinically 
appropriate medications or taking their medications as prescribed 
(adherence).
21 The literature search was performed from April 2018 to 
July 2018 using keyword searches in bibliographic databases, including 
ProQuest, EBSCO, and Scopus. We limited our search to studies 
published beginning in 2006—the year the Part D program began. 
For our searches, we developed a list of search terms for our literature 
review by reviewing relevant background documentation and several 
database searches. The search terms included: “utilization management,” 
“prior authorization,” “quantity limits,” “step therapy,” “generic 
substitution,” “drug utilization review,” “quantity edit,” “medication therapy 
management,” and “comprehensive medication review,” combined with 
                                                                                                                       
20Quantity dispensed is measured in units such as milliliters or milligrams. For a given 
drug, we summed the total number units given to Medicare beneficiaries and divided it by 
the gross expenditures for the drug.  
21Utilization management services may be included under various combinations of the 10 
prescription drug benefit management services, instead of being a distinct service that 
Part D plan sponsors report to CMS in its HPMS database.  
Analysis of Literature on 
Effect of Utilization 
Management Services 
===PAGE 43===
 
Appendix I: Objectives, Scope, and 
Methodology 
 
 
 
 
Page 37 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
“access,” “adherence,” “health benefit,” “clinical outcome,” “generic use,” 
“cost effectiveness,” “savings,” “costs,” and “Medicare.” 
The literature search generated 700 studies. We reviewed this list by 
examining the abstracts for those studies that addressed the effects of 
utilization management services in Part D and were published in peer-
reviewed journals. We identified 48 studies that met our criteria then 
added four more that met the criteria from several literature reviews we 
examined, resulting in a final group of 52 peer-reviewed studies that we 
analyzed. We analyzed these studies to group them by type of utilization 
management service evaluated and type of outcome measured. We 
documented any methodological limitations of these studies but did not 
exclude any of them on this basis. See the bibliography in Appendix VII 
for a list of the 52 studies in our review. 
We also interviewed PBMs, plan sponsors, and drug manufacturers to 
obtain their views regarding the impact of utilization management 
services in Part D plans and asked them to recommend additional studies 
on utilization management services. We did not assess the methodology 
or data reliability of the studies provided to us by these drug supply chain 
stakeholders; none of them met our criterion of being published in peer-
reviewed journals. We used these studies to better understand 
stakeholder perspectives. 
 
To ensure the data used to produce this report were sufficiently reliable, 
we took several steps. We performed data reliability checks on the HPMS 
data by reviewing the data for missing values and errors, checking the 
information against other publicly available sources, and interviewing 
knowledgeable agency officials. We performed data reliability checks on 
the PDE and DIR data by reviewing relevant documentation, checking the 
data for outliers and errors, and interviewing knowledgeable agency 
officials. We performed data reliability checks of the AWP and NADAC 
data sets by testing the data for missing data and outliers and reviewing 
relevant documentation. After taking these steps, we determined the data 
were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our reporting objectives.  
We conducted this performance audit from May 2017 to July 2019 in 
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. 
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain 
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our 
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that 
Data Reliability 
===PAGE 44===
 
Appendix I: Objectives, Scope, and 
Methodology 
 
 
 
 
Page 38 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings based 
on our audit objectives. 
===PAGE 45===
 
Appendix II: Medicare Part D Plan Sponsors’ 
Use of Pharmacy Benefit Managers (PBM) 
 
 
 
 
Page 39 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
This appendix provides additional detail on the use of PBMs by Part D 
plan sponsors to provide prescription drug benefit management services 
to Medicare beneficiaries. 
 
We examined Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services’ (CMS) data to 
identify the 10 key drug benefit management services provided by PBMs 
under 624 Part D plan sponsor contracts in 2016, the most recent 
available expenditure and rebate and other price concession data at the 
time of our analysis, and found the following variation in plan sponsor use 
of PBMs:
1 
• Services provided by PBMs. Part D plan sponsors’ contracts varied 
by the services provided by PBMs in 2016. Plan sponsors’ use of a 
PBM for drug benefit services—either alone or with the plan 
sponsor—for their 624 contracts varied from 30 percent for enrollee 
appeals and grievance process-management to 99 percent for claims 
adjudication. For seven of the 10 drug benefit management services, 
PBMs—either alone or in conjunction with the plan sponsor—provided 
services to more than half the sponsor contracts (see fig. 4). 
                                                                                                                       
1In this report, we refer to a drug plan or plans covered under each sponsor contract with 
CMS as a “Part D plan sponsor contract.” 
Appendix II: Medicare Part D Plan Sponsors’ 
Use of Pharmacy Benefit Managers (PBM)  
Part D Plan Sponsors’ Use 
of PBMs 
===PAGE 46===
 
Appendix II: Medicare Part D Plan Sponsors’ 
Use of Pharmacy Benefit Managers (PBM) 
 
 
 
 
Page 40 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
Figure 4: Medicare Part D Plan Sponsor Contract Use of Pharmacy Benefit Managers (PBM) for 10 Drug Benefit Management 
Services, by Percent of Contracts, 2016 
 
Note: We analyzed CMS Health Plan Management System data for 2016 that identified the entity or 
entities responsible for performing each of 10 key drug benefit management services for the 624 Part 
D plan sponsor contracts in effect in 2016. We excluded contracts that participated in the Medicare 
Program of All-Inclusive Care because they are exempted from Part D requirements such as charging 
beneficiaries cost-sharing. 
 
• Number of PBMs used. Part D plan sponsor contracts varied in the 
number of PBMs used to provide one or more of the 10 drug benefit 
management services. For example, 54 percent of plan sponsors’ 

===PAGE 47===
 
Appendix II: Medicare Part D Plan Sponsors’ 
Use of Pharmacy Benefit Managers (PBM) 
 
 
 
 
Page 41 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
contracts used a single PBM, while 11 percent used four or more 
PBMs (see fig. 5). 
 
Figure 5: Number of Pharmacy Benefit Managers (PBM) Used for 10 Drug Benefit 
Management Services by Percent of All Medicare Part D Plan Sponsor Contracts, 
2016 
 
Note: We analyzed CMS Health Plan Management System data for 2016 that identified the entity or 
entities responsible for performing each of 10 key drug benefit management services for the 624 Part 
D plan sponsor contracts in effect in 2016. We excluded contracts that participated in the Medicare 
Program of All-Inclusive Care because they are exempted from certain Part D requirements, such as 
charging beneficiaries cost-sharing. 
 
• Use of PBMs by enrollment. Smaller Part D contracts—those with 
contract enrollment below the median enrollment of all Part D 
contracts—used a PBM more often than larger contracts—those with 
enrollment at or above the median. For instance, 87 percent of 
smaller Part D plan sponsor contracts used a PBM alone or with the 
plan sponsor for rebate and price concession negotiations, compared 
to 77 percent of larger contracts. Similarly, 54 percent of smaller Part 
D contracts used a PBM alone or with a plan for a pharmacy and 
therapeutics committee, compared to 35 percent of larger contracts. 
• Use of financially related PBMs. Part D plan sponsors’ contracts 
varied by their use of PBMs with which they were related by common 

===PAGE 48===
 
Appendix II: Medicare Part D Plan Sponsors’ 
Use of Pharmacy Benefit Managers (PBM) 
 
 
 
 
Page 42 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
ownership—either as a subsidiary or a sister company.2 In 2016, plan 
sponsors used a PBM with which they were related by common 
ownership for 17 percent of the 624 Part D plan sponsors contracts. 
Larger contracts—those with enrollment at or above the median—
were more likely to use a PBM related by common ownership than 
smaller contracts. Larger contracts used a financially related PBM for 
24 percent of drug benefit management services, compared to 10 
percent of drug benefit management services provided to smaller 
contracts. 
 
The Part D plan sponsor representatives with whom we spoke noted 
several considerations that influenced their decision about how and 
whether to use a PBM. One plan sponsor noted that small plans may lack 
the resources to conduct their own rebate negotiations and, therefore, 
may use a PBM instead. Three other plan sponsors noted they switched 
from conducting their own rebate negotiation with manufacturers to using 
a PBM. Two plan sponsors said this switch was due to PBMs’ ability to 
obtain larger rebates than the plan sponsor could, and the third 
determined a PBM would help it achieve the best value and quality, while 
meeting Part D’s regulatory requirements. 
In contrast, representatives of three other Part D plan sponsors noted 
advantages of performing drug benefit management services themselves. 
For example, one plan sponsor noted that it performs almost all drug 
benefit management services internally, as it believes doing so improves 
quality through better communication and care coordination with 
pharmacies. Another plan sponsor noted the decision not to contract out 
certain services to a PBM may be influenced by a desire for more 
customization over formulary management and greater control over prior 
authorization. Representatives of one plan sponsor noted that their plan 
does not use a PBM because they believe they are more effective in 
developing formularies with better utilization management and greater 
use of generic drugs than are PBMs.
3 
 
                                                                                                                       
2For example, UnitedHealth Group owns UnitedHealthcare—which operates Part D 
plans—and OptumRx—a PBM.  
3Greater use of generic drugs is associated with financial savings, as generics are 
generally less expensive than brand-name drugs.  
Factors Influencing Plans’ 
Decisions to Use a PBM 
===PAGE 49===
 
Appendix II: Medicare Part D Plan Sponsors’ 
Use of Pharmacy Benefit Managers (PBM) 
 
 
 
 
Page 43 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
Our analysis of CMS data for the 624 Part D plan sponsor contracts found 
that the five PBMs that provided the largest number of services to Part D 
plan sponsors’ contracts in 2016 also generally provided a full range of 
PBM services to them. Four of the top five PBMs provided all 10 drug 
benefit management services to plan sponsors’ contracts while the fifth 
PBM conducted claims adjudication but used an intermediary to conduct 
rebate negotiations.4 (See table 4). Furthermore, the top five PBMs 
provided a high proportion of the services that Part D plan sponsors most 
commonly used a PBM to provide. For example, CVS Caremark provided 
claims adjudication to 144 (23 percent) of Part D plan sponsor contracts, 
and OptumRx provided this service to 138 (22 percent). 
Table 4: Number of Medicare Part D Plan Contracts That Used Top Five Pharmacy Benefit Managers (PBM) for Drug Benefit 
Management Services, 2016 
 Number of contracts that used each PBM for the service (n=624) 
Drug benefit management service CVS Caremark OptumRx Express Scripts MedImpact Argusa 
Claims adjudication  144 138 93 73 74 
Drug benefit administration 145 134 92 73 73 
Coordination with drug benefit 
programs 
137 120 89 67 61 
Customer service  91 87 30 49 9 
Pharmacy network development  142 130 93 73 29 
Enrollment processing 14 3 3 8 0 
Management of a pharmacy and 
therapeutics committee 
79 18 21 50 0 
Rebate and price concession 
negotiation  
119 120 86 59 3 
Enrollee appeals and grievance 
management 
44 11 17 25  0 
Pharmacy technical assistance  124 132 91 69 66 
Source: GAO analysis of Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) data. | GAO-19-498 
Note: We analyzed CMS Health Plan Management System data for 2016 that identified the entity or 
entities responsible for performing each of 10 key drug benefit management services for the 624 Part 
D plan sponsor contracts in effect in 2016. We excluded contracts that participated in the Medicare 
Program of All-Inclusive Care because they are exempted from Part D requirements, such as 
charging beneficiaries cost-sharing. In some instances, a Part D plan sponsor used more than one 
PBM to provide a drug benefit management service. In these instances, multiple PBMs were counted 
as providing the same service in our summary counts. 
a
Argus is known as DST Pharmacy Solutions as of September 2017. 
                                                                                                                       
4This PBM did not provide enrollment processing or appeals and grievance process-
management.  
Variation in the Number of 
Services Provided by 
PBMs to Part D Plan 
Sponsors 
===PAGE 50===
 
Appendix II: Medicare Part D Plan Sponsors’ 
Use of Pharmacy Benefit Managers (PBM) 
 
 
 
 
Page 44 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
In contrast, we found that Part D plan sponsors used a large number of 
PBMs to provide a limited range of drug benefit management services. 
For example, 48 percent of PBMs provided only one type of drug benefit 
management service to plan sponsors’ contracts, and 22 percent of 
PBMs provided only one service to only one plan sponsor contract. For 
instance, there were 10 unique entities counted as PBMs in our analysis 
that provided only customer service support to one plan sponsor contract. 
One PBM representative noted in an interview that it is relatively common 
for plan sponsors and PBMs to contract with other vendors to provide 
additional assistance with drug benefit management services. One plan 
sponsor told us, for example, that its PBM uses a vendor to manage 
customer service calls. 
 
===PAGE 51===
 
Appendix III: Information on Pharmacy Benefit 
Manager (PBM) Revenue Earned from 
Manufacturers and from Spread Pricing 
 
 
 
 
Page 45 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
This appendix provides additional detail on (1) non-rebate revenue that 
PBMs may earn for services provided to manufacturers and Medicare 
Part D plan sponsors, and (2) PBM perspectives on Centers for Medicare 
& Medicaid Services (CMS) policies relating to spread pricing in Part D. 
 
PBMs and Part D plan sponsors may earn non-rebate revenue from 
manufacturers for providing certain services. Even though this money is 
reported to CMS as part of the rebate and other price concession 
submission, not all of it is considered rebates or other price concessions, 
which will lower plan liability in determining bids and thereby lower 
premiums. Of the $516.5 million in non-rebate revenue paid by 
manufacturers in 2016, $440 million, or about 85 percent, represented the 
amount paid for the services that exceeded the fair market value of the 
service and is considered rebates and other price concessions. These 
may be used to reduce the drug costs incurred by the plan sponsor. 
Therefore, this revenue factors into bid determinations and may be used 
to reduce premiums. 
The remaining $78.6 million in payments from manufacturers were 
considered “bona fide service fees”—fees paid by manufacturers to Part 
D plan sponsors and PBMs for services that the manufacturer would 
otherwise perform, or contract for, and that represented the fair market 
value of those services. Such fees do not reduce the plan sponsor’s drug 
costs and, therefore, could not factor into reducing premiums. 
1 The 
determination of a bona fide service fee as reported to CMS is made by 
the drug manufacturer and the Part D plan sponsor and is not routinely 
evaluated by CMS, agency officials told us. However, CMS requires that 
the PBM and manufacturer have information documenting the fair market 
value of the service. 
 
CMS requires Part D plan sponsors to report revenue earned from 
rebates retained by the PBM. This revenue increases the plan’s liability, 
which increases the amount of plan bids and, therefore, result in higher 
premiums. In contrast, rebate revenue passed through by PBMs to Part D 
plan sponsors lowers the plan’s liability, reduces plans bids, and, 
therefore, lowers beneficiary premiums. 
                                                                                                                       
1See 74 Fed. Reg. 1494, 1512 (Jan. 12, 2009) (preamble, II.B.4.a.). 
Appendix III: Information on Pharmacy 
Benefit Manager (PBM) Revenue Earned 
from Manufacturers and from Spread Pricing 
Non-rebate Revenue That 
PBMs May Earn for 
Services Provided to 
Manufacturers and Part D 
Plan Sponsors 
Stakeholder Perspectives 
on PBM Revenue Earned 
from Spread Pricing, 
Rebate Retention, and 
Differences from the 
Commercial Sector 
===PAGE 52===
 
Appendix III: Information on Pharmacy Benefit 
Manager (PBM) Revenue Earned from 
Manufacturers and from Spread Pricing 
 
 
 
 
Page 46 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
Some PBMs earn more revenue from spread pricing in their commercial 
business than in Part D, officials from three PBMs told us. Officials from 
two of these PBMs noted that CMS requirements create a disincentive to 
engage in spread pricing that is not present in the commercial sector. 
Beginning in 2010, CMS required that plan sponsors base the amount of 
beneficiary cost-sharing on the amount received by the pharmacy for a 
drug—known as the “pass-through price.”
2 CMS also required that an 
estimate of rebates or other price concessions be included in the 
administrative costs submitted by the plan sponsor for bid 
determinations.3 Part D plan sponsors can still agree to pay the PBM 
based on the higher price of the drug without accounting for rebates, 
known as the lock-in price. However, the difference between that amount 
and the pass-through price would increase the bid determination and 
ultimately increase the premiums that plans charge beneficiaries. 4 
Because there are no similar requirements pertaining to the commercial 
prescription drug benefit market, spread pricing is more common there, 
CMS officials told us. 
                                                                                                                       
2See 74 Fed. Reg. 1505, 1543 (Jan. 12, 2009) (preamble, II.B.3.b.) (codified at 42 C.F.R. 
§ 423.100) (2018) (amending definition of “negotiated prices” upon which cost sharing is 
based to include reductions due to price concessions). 
3See 74 Fed. Reg. 1512, 1513, 1544 (Jan. 12, 2009) (preamble II.B.4.a., b.)(codified at 42 
C.F.R. § 423.308 (2018)) (amending definitions of “actually paid” and “administrative 
costs” to provide that rebates or price concessions are administrative costs, which will be 
included in the determination of bid amounts). 
4See 42 C.F.R. §§ 423.265 (c) (2018) (costs included in bids). 
===PAGE 53===
 
Appendix IV: Expenditures and Rebate and 
Other Price Concession Information for 
Medicare Part D Drugs 
 
 
 
 
Page 47 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
This appendix provides information on (1) pharmacy-related price 
concessions for all Medicare Part D drugs and (2) expenditure and rebate 
and other price concession information for the 444 highest expenditure, 
highest utilization brand-name Part D drugs in 2016. The appendix also 
contains additional information on expenditures and rebates and other 
price concessions obtained by the 16 Part D plan sponsors whose 
representatives we interviewed. 
 
The amount of pharmacy-related price concessions obtained by Part D 
plan sponsors, or pharmacy benefit managers (PBM) on plan sponsors’ 
behalf, increased 295 percent from 2014 through 2016, from $538 million 
to $2.1 billion (see fig. 6). These monies account for any adjustments to 
the price of the drug paid to the pharmacy after the point sale, such as a 
pharmacy returning money that was overpaid by the plan sponsor or vice 
versa. It can also include monies paid based on pharmacies’ performance 
in meeting agreed-upon performance metrics—for example, fees a 
pharmacy pay plan sponsors, or bonuses pharmacies receive from plan 
sponsors, based on their performance.
1 In 2016, Part D plan sponsors 
received $2.3 billion from pharmacies and paid out $211 million, for a net 
of $2.1 billion in pharmacy-related price concessions. 
                                                                                                                       
1An example of a performance metric is a specified percent of prescriptions dispensed for 
a generic drug (instead of a brand-name drug). 
Appendix IV: Expenditures and Rebate and 
Other Price Concession Information for 
Medicare Part D Drugs 
Pharmacy-Related Price 
Concessions for All Part D 
Drugs 
===PAGE 54===
 
Appendix IV: Expenditures and Rebate and 
Other Price Concession Information for 
Medicare Part D Drugs 
 
 
 
 
Page 48 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
Figure 6: Pharmacy-related Price Concessions, 2014-2016 
 
Note: We analyzed 2014 through 2016 price concession data contained in the direct and indirect 
remuneration data submitted by Medicare Part D plan sponsors to CMS. Specifically, we analyzed 
monies paid to, and received from, pharmacies that affect the price of a drug paid by a Part D plan 
sponsor and pharmacy benefit manager on its behalf following the purchase from a pharmacy. 
 
Five of the seven PBMs and seven of the 12 Part D plan sponsors whose 
representatives we interviewed said they have performance-based 
arrangements with pharmacies. One plan sponsor noted that its 
performance agreement involves paying bonuses to pharmacies that 
exceed performance measures, while charging fees to pharmacies that 
did not meet the measures. The sponsor said this is part of an attempt to 
move from paying for volume to paying for value. Another plan sponsor 
told us there has been an improvement in pharmacy performance as a 
result of the program. 
Representatives from pharmacy industry groups said these pharmacy-
related fees have put increasing pressure on pharmacies. For example, 
one group noted there is no standardization across measures with each 
plan sponsor using its own measures, and it is difficult for pharmacies to 
tie a fee to a specific pharmacy location or claim. Another group noted 
that fees may be imposed on pharmacies for performance measures not 
directly applicable to the pharmacy. For example, the group said specialty 

===PAGE 55===
 
Appendix IV: Expenditures and Rebate and 
Other Price Concession Information for 
Medicare Part D Drugs 
 
 
 
 
Page 49 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
pharmacies have been assessed fees for beneficiary lack of adherence to 
maintenance medications, such as blood pressure medications, that 
these pharmacies do not commonly provide. 
 
PBMs and Part D plan sponsors obtained rebates and other price 
concessions for 441 (99 percent) of the 444 highest-expenditure, highest-
utilization brand-name drugs in 2016. The amount of rebates and other 
price concessions for each drug ranged from $1,300 to $1.8 billion in 
2016, with a median of $3.3 million.2 Rebates accounted for $24.5 billion 
of the $26 billion in rebates and other price concessions (94 percent) 
obtained by plan sponsors and PBMs for these 444 drugs. As a 
proportion of gross Part D expenditures—the amount paid by plan 
sponsors, or the PBM on the sponsors’ behalf, and by beneficiaries—for 
the 444 drugs ranged from -0.5 percent to 70.5 percent.3 (See fig. 7.) 
                                                                                                                       
2Three of the 444 drugs had “negative rebates and other price concessions” ranging from 
-$10,000 to -$37,000 in 2016. According to CMS, negative rebate and other price 
concession amounts may occur when, for example, risk-sharing arrangements between a 
plan sponsor and a physician network resulted in more in bonuses paid to the network for 
reducing drug costs than was received from manufacturers in rebates.  
3Gross expenditures do not account for rebates and other price concessions. Generic 
drugs received few rebates and other price concessions compared to brand-name drugs. 
In 2016, all 476 generic drugs in our analysis received rebates and other price 
concessions, ranging from $48 to $8.9 million for a drug. The amount of rebates and other 
price concessions obtained for these drugs accounted for 2.3 percent ($547 million) of the 
$23.9 billion spent on these drugs in 2016. Of the 476 generic drugs, 379 received 
rebates, which ranged from $1 to $2 million for a drug. Across the 920 highest 
expenditure, highest utilization brand-name and generic drugs in our analysis, generic 
drugs received 0.13 percent of the $24.6 billion in rebates and 26 percent ($515 million) of 
the $2 billion in price concessions. 
Expenditure and Rebate 
and Other Price 
Concession Information 
for 444 Highest 
Expenditure, Highest 
Utilization Brand-Name 
Drugs 
===PAGE 56===
 
Appendix IV: Expenditures and Rebate and 
Other Price Concession Information for 
Medicare Part D Drugs 
 
 
 
 
Page 50 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
Figure 7: Rebates and Other Price Concessions Received for the Highest-
Expenditure, Highest-Utilization Medicare Part D Brand-Name Drugs as a 
Proportion of Their Gross Expenditures, 2016 
 
Note: We analyzed CMS expenditure and rebate and other price concession data from the 
prescription drug event and direct and indirect remuneration DIR data sets for three groups of brand-
name drugs: the 200 with the highest expenditures, the 200 with the highest utilization, and the 200 
with the highest expenditures per utilization (i.e., highest expenditure per number of 30-day 
prescriptions). We identified drugs that had common ingredients, strengths, dose, and route of 
administration and combined them. This resulted in a group of 444 unique brand-name drugs across 
the three groups. 
 

===PAGE 57===
 
Appendix IV: Expenditures and Rebate and 
Other Price Concession Information for 
Medicare Part D Drugs 
 
 
 
 
Page 51 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
Expenditures and rebates and other price concessions varied by 
therapeutic class for the 444 highest expenditure, highest utilization drugs 
in 2016. Among those with 10 or more drugs in their class, gross 
expenditures ranged from $2.9 billion to $21.2 billion, and rebates and 
other price concessions ranged from $170 million to $8.7 billion (see table 
5). Four classes—endocrine metabolic agents, anti-infective agents, 
respiratory agents, and central nervous system agents—accounted for 54 
percent of the gross Part D expenditures, and 62 percent of rebates and 
other price concessions for the 444 highest expenditure, highest 
utilization drugs.
4 When accounting for rebates and other price 
concessions, these drugs accounted for 51 percent of net Part D 
expenditures. 
Table 5: Expenditures and Rebates and Other Price Concessions for the 444 Highest Expenditure, Highest Utilization 
Medicare Part D Brand-Name Drugs, by Therapeutic Class, 2016 
Therapeutic class Drugs Expenditures 
(in dollars) 
Rebates and other 
price concessions 
(in dollars) 
Rebates and other 
price concessions 
as proportion of 
expenditures 
(percent) 
Endocrine metabolic agent 69 21,159,397,592 8,706,047,671 41 
Anti-infective agent 34 11,225,406,324 2,217,176,860 20 
Respiratory agent 31 9,886,018,944 3,175,329,544 32 
Central nervous system agent 57 8,505,550,786 1,910,305,516 22 
Antineoplastic agent 81 8,371,964,875 169,735,568 2 
Cardiovascular agent 51 8,002,376,936 3,064,718,411 38 
Immunological agent 28 6,307,238,469 256,298,135 4 
Blood modifier agent 19 5,392,226,626 1,444,676,699 27 
Genitourinary agent 14 3,561,199,830 1,406,975,264 40 
Musculoskeletal agent 10 3,515,156,333 589,240,842 17 
                                                                                                                       
4Part D plans are required to provide access to all drugs covered under certain 
therapeutic classes of drugs, known as Medicare protected classes: (1) anticonvulsants, 
(2) antidepressants, (3) antineoplastics, (4) antipsychotics, (5) antiretrovirals, and (6) 
immunosuppressants for the treatment of transplant. Antineoplastic and immunological 
drugs, which are part of Medicare’s protected classes, received the lowest amount of 
direct and indirect remuneration (DIR) relative to their gross Part D expenditures. Because 
the therapeutic class information in Truven Health Analytics’ Redbook does not align with 
Medicare’s protected classes, we were unable to determine which of the 444 highest 
expenditure, highest utilization drugs fell in under the protected classes. Furthermore, it is 
unclear if antineoplastic and immunological drugs received relatively few rebates and 
other price concessions as result of the protected class requirement or other factors.  
Expenditures and Rebates 
and Other Price 
Concessions for the 444 
Highest Expenditure, 
Highest Utilization Part D 
Brand-Name Drugs, by 
Therapeutic Drug Class, 
2016 
===PAGE 58===
 
Appendix IV: Expenditures and Rebate and 
Other Price Concession Information for 
Medicare Part D Drugs 
 
 
 
 
Page 52 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
Therapeutic class Drugs Expenditures 
(in dollars) 
Rebates and other 
price concessions 
(in dollars) 
Rebates and other 
price concessions 
as proportion of 
expenditures 
(percent) 
Gastrointestinal agent 17 3,077,243,117 1,430,029,308 46 
Ophthalmologic agent 14 2,930,528,225 1,332,099,094 45 
Source: GAO analysis of Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) data and data from Truven Health Analytics. | GAO-19-498 
Notes: We analyzed CMS expenditure and rebate and other price concession information, known as 
direct and indirect remuneration, for the following groups of brand-name drugs: the 200 drugs with the 
highest expenditures, the 200 drugs with the highest utilization, and the 200 drugs with the highest 
expenditures per 30-day prescription. We identified drugs that had common ingredients, strengths, 
dose, and route of administration. This resulted in a group of 444 unique brand-name drugs across 
the three groups of drugs. We identified therapeutic class information using information from Red 
Book, a compendium published by Truven Health Analytics. 
We omitted the six therapeutic classes in our analysis with fewer than 10 drugs in their class: nasal 
agents, dermatological agents, antidotes, nutritive agents, dependency agents, and diagnostic 
agents. 
 
Rebates and other price concessions as a proportion of gross 
expenditures varied from 4 percent to 27 percent in 2016 for the 17 Part 
D plan sponsors whose representatives we interviewed. Gross Part D 
expenditures per beneficiary ranged from $1,772 to $5,583, and net Part 
D expenditures per beneficiary ranged from $1,687 to $4,837 (see table 
6). 
Table 6: Gross and Net Expenditure Information for the 17 Medicare Part D Plan Sponsors GAO Interviewed, 2016 
Part D Sponsor 2016 Rebates and other price 
concessions as a percentage of gross 
Part D expenditures (percent) 
2016 Gross Part D 
expenditures 
per Beneficiary (dollars) 
2016 Net Part D 
expenditures 
per beneficiary (dollars) 
Sponsor A 27 4,609 3,359 
Sponsor B 27 4,262 3,125 
Sponsor C 25 3,640 2,728 
Sponsor D 18 3,412 2,801 
Sponsor E 17 2,800 2,312 
Sponsor F 17 3,350 2,777 
Sponsor G 17 3,031 2,529 
Sponsor H 16 4,132 3,468 
Sponsor I 16 5,503 4,618 
Sponsor J 16 4,398 3,709 
Sponsor K 13 2,753 2,385 
Sponsor L 13 5,583 4,837 
Sponsor M 11 3,379 3,004 
Gross and Net Part D 
Expenditures Varied 
among Selected Part D 
Plan Sponsors in 2016 
===PAGE 59===
 
Appendix IV: Expenditures and Rebate and 
Other Price Concession Information for 
Medicare Part D Drugs 
 
 
 
 
Page 53 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
Part D Sponsor 2016 Rebates and other price 
concessions as a percentage of gross 
Part D expenditures (percent) 
2016 Gross Part D 
expenditures 
per Beneficiary (dollars) 
2016 Net Part D 
expenditures 
per beneficiary (dollars) 
Sponsor N 11 4,521 4,039 
Sponsor O 10  2,597 2,347 
Sponsor P 5 1,772 1,687 
Sponsor Q 4 2,806 2,700 
Source: GAO analysis of Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) data. | GAO-19-498 
Notes: We analyzed CMS expenditure and rebate and other price concession information, known as 
direct and indirect remuneration, for the following groups of brand-name drugs: the 200 with the 
highest expenditures, the 200 with the highest utilization, and the 200 with the highest expenditures 
per 30-day prescription. We identified drugs that had common ingredients, strengths, dose, and route 
of administration. This resulted in a group of 444 unique brand-name drugs across the three groups 
of drugs. 
Gross expenditures reflect what was paid to the pharmacy by the Part D plan sponsor, pharmacy 
benefit managers on the sponsor’s behalf, and the beneficiary for a given drug. Net expenditures 
reflect any rebates and discounts obtained by plan sponsors and pharmacy benefit managers after a 
beneficiary receives a drug. 
===PAGE 60===
 
Appendix V: Information on Discounts Off 
Manufacturer List Prices for Brand-Name and 
Generic Medicare Part D Drugs 
 
 
 
 
Page 54 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
This appendix contains additional information on the gross and net 
discounts for the highest expenditure, highest utilization brand-name and 
generic Medicare Part D drugs in 2016. 
 
The amount of discounts in 2016 for the 444 highest expenditure, highest 
utilization brand-name drugs varied by whether they were sold in retail or 
specialty pharmacies. Discounts also varied by whether the brand-name 
drugs were highest expenditure, highest utilization or highest expenditure 
per utilization drugs.1 Of the 444 highest expenditure, highest utilization 
brand-name drugs, 244 were sold in retail pharmacies and 200 were sold 
in specialty pharmacies.2 
• Brand-name retail drugs. The three groups of drugs all had 
pharmacy acquisition costs that were 81 percent of manufacturer list 
prices and gross Part D prices that were between 83 and 84 percent 
of manufacturer list prices in 2016. However, the net prices varied, 
ranging from 55 percent of manufacturer list price for the highest 
utilization drugs to 77 percent for the highest expenditure per 
utilization drugs (see table 7).3 
• Brand-name specialty drugs. The 38 highest expenditure drugs and 
187 highest expenditure per utilization drugs sold in specialty 
pharmacies had median gross prices that were between 84 and 85 
                                                                                                                       
1Prices are the 2016 median prices for the brand-name drugs that met the following 
criteria: the 200 drugs with the highest expenditures, the 200 drugs with the highest 
utilization, and the 200 drugs with the highest expenditures per 30-day prescription. We 
identified drugs that had common ingredients, strengths, dosages, or routes of 
administration. This resulted in a list of 444 unique brand-name drugs across the three 
groups because some drugs met more than one criterion and therefore appeared in more 
than one group. 
2We determined whether a drug was sold in retail or specialty pharmacies based on 
National Drug Acquisition Cost (NADAC data). We found that 97 percent of the 444 
highest expenditure, highest utilization brand-name drugs that lacked NADAC were listed 
as specialty drugs on a Part D plan sponsor’s formulary. Given this, we refer to drugs that 
do not have a NADAC price as those sold in specialty pharmacies. 
3Manufacturer list price is the median average wholesale price—the list price 
manufacturers suggest wholesalers charge pharmacies for a drug. Pharmacy acquisition 
cost reflects prices reported in surveys of community retail pharmacies in the NADAC data 
set. Gross Part D prices reflect median unit prices paid to pharmacies by Part D plan 
sponsors, pharmacy benefit managers (PBM) on the sponsor’s behalf, and the 
beneficiary, and net Part D prices account for rebates and other price concessions 
obtained by plan sponsors for these drugs as reported in the direct and indirect 
remuneration (DIR) data set.   
Appendix V: Information on Discounts Off 
Manufacturer List Prices for Brand-Name 
and Generic Medicare Part D Drugs 
Information on the Extent 
to Which Brand-Name 
Part D Drugs Were 
Discounted Off 
Manufacturer List Prices 
===PAGE 61===
 
Appendix V: Information on Discounts Off 
Manufacturer List Prices for Brand-Name and 
Generic Medicare Part D Drugs 
 
 
 
 
Page 55 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
percent of manufacturer list price and net prices that were 84 percent 
of manufacturer list price in 2016.4 
Table 7: Medicare Part D Median Unit Drug Part D Prices as a Percentage of Manufacturer List Prices for the Highest 
Expenditure, Highest Utilization Brand-Name Drugs Sold in Retail and Specialty Pharmacies, 2016 
 
 
Brand-name retail drugs Brand-name specialty drugs 
Count 
(number 
of drugs) 
Pharmacy 
acquisition 
cost (percent) 
Gross Part D 
price 
(percent) 
Net Part D 
price 
(percent) 
Count 
(number of 
drugs) 
Pharmacy 
acquisition 
cost 
(percent)a 
Gross Part D 
price 
(percent) 
Net Part D 
price 
(percent) 
Median 200 
highest 
expenditure 
162 81 83 59 38 n/a 85 84 
Median 200 
highest 
utilization 
199 81 83 55 1 n/a n/ab n/ab 
Median 200 
highest 
expenditure 
per 
utilization 
13 81 84 77 187 n/a 84 84 
Legend: n/a = not applicable 
Source: GAO analysis of Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) data and data from Truven Analytics. I GAO-19-498 
Notes: Prices are the 2016 median prices for the brand-name drugs that met these criteria: the 200 
drugs with the highest expenditures, the 200 drugs with the highest utilization, and the 200 drugs with 
the highest expenditures per utilization (i.e., highest expenditure per number of 30-day prescriptions). 
We identified drugs that had common ingredients, strengths, dosages, and routes of administration. 
This resulted in a group of 444 unique brand-name drugs across the three groups because some 
drugs met multiple criteria and appeared in more than one group. Of these 444 brand-name drugs, 
244 were drugs sold in retail pharmacies, and 200 were drugs sold in specialty pharmacies. 
Manufacturer list price is the median average wholesale price. Pharmacy acquisition cost reflects 
prices reported in surveys of community retail pharmacies in the National Average Drug Acquisition 
Cost data set. Gross Part D prices reflect median unit prices paid to pharmacies by Part D plan 
sponsors, pharmacy benefit managers on the sponsor’s behalf, and the beneficiary and net Part D 
prices account for rebates and other price concessions obtained by plan sponsors for these drugs as 
reported in the direct and indirect remuneration data set. 
a
Pharmacy acquisition cost data are unavailable for drugs sold in specialty pharmacies, as these 
pharmacies are not surveyed by CMS. 
b
Only one of the highest utilization drugs was sold in specialty pharmacies; therefore, we omitted 
pricing data on that drug. 
 
We also found variation in brand-name prices across therapeutic classes 
for the 244 highest expenditure, highest utilization Part D drugs sold in 
                                                                                                                       
4Pharmacy acquisition cost data are unavailable for drugs sold in specialty pharmacies, as 
non-retail pharmacies are not surveyed by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services 
(CMS). Only one of the highest utilization drugs was sold in specialty pharmacies; 
therefore, we omitted pricing data on that drug.  
===PAGE 62===
 
Appendix V: Information on Discounts Off 
Manufacturer List Prices for Brand-Name and 
Generic Medicare Part D Drugs 
 
 
 
 
Page 56 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
retail pharmacies.5 In 2016, median gross Part D prices for the brand-
name drugs sold in retail pharmacies were similar across the nine 
therapeutic classes we analyzed, ranging from 81 percent to 84 percent 
of the manufacturer list price.6 However, there was a much wider range 
among median net prices, from 43 percent to 83 percent of manufacturer 
list price. Anti-infective agents had the lowest percentage point changes 
in their prices from gross to net (1 percentage point), while endocrine 
metabolic agents, cardiovascular agents, respiratory agents, 
ophthalmologic agents, and genitourinary agents had the largest 
changes, with declines from gross to net of greater than 30 or more 
percentage points (see table 8). 
Table 8: Medicare Part D Median Unit Drug Prices as a Percentage of Manufacturer List Prices by Therapeutic Class for the 
Highest Expenditure, Highest Utilization Brand-name Drugs Sold in Retail Pharmacies, 2016  
Therapeutic Class Count Pharmacy acquisition 
cost (percent) 
Gross Part D price 
(percent) 
Net Part D price 
(percent) 
Endocrine metabolic agent 48 81 82 52 
Central nervous system agent  39 80 84 60 
Cardiovascular agent 27 81 81 50 
Respiratory agent  26 81 83 51 
Anti-infective agent 22 81 84 83 
Ophthalmologic agent  14 81 83 43 
Gastrointestinal agent  13 80 84 56 
Genitourinary agent  13 81 83 44 
Blood modifier agent  12 81 83 60 
Source: GAO analysis of Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) data and data from Truven Health Analytics. | GAO-19-498 
Notes: Prices are the 2016 median prices for the 244 brand-name drugs that were sold in retail 
pharmacies and were among the following three groups of drugs which included drugs sold in retail 
and specialty pharmacies: the 200 drugs with the highest expenditures, the 200 drugs with the 
highest utilization, and the 200 drugs with the highest expenditures per 30-day prescription. We 
identified drugs that had common ingredients, strengths, dosages, and routes of administration. This 
resulted in a group of 444 unique brand-name drugs across the three groups because some drugs 
met multiple criteria and appeared in more than one group. Of these 444 brand-name drugs 244 were 
drugs sold in retail pharmacies, and 200 were drugs sold in specialty pharmacies. 
                                                                                                                       
5Of the 244 highest expenditure, highest utilization brand-name drugs sold in retail 
pharmacies, 19.7 percent were endocrine metabolic agents; 16 percent were central 
nervous system agents; 11.1 percent were cardiovascular agents; and 10.7 percent were 
respiratory agents.  
6We omitted the eight therapeutic classes in our analysis with fewer than 10 drugs in their 
class: antidotes, antineoplastic agents, dermatological agents, dependency agents, 
immunological agents, musculoskeletal agents, nasal agents, and nutritive agents; these 
accounted for 30 brand-name drugs sold in retail pharmacies. 
===PAGE 63===
 
Appendix V: Information on Discounts Off 
Manufacturer List Prices for Brand-Name and 
Generic Medicare Part D Drugs 
 
 
 
 
Page 57 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
We omitted the eight therapeutic classes in our analysis with fewer than 10 drugs in their class: 
antidotes, antineoplastic agents, dermatological agents, dependency agents, immunological agents, 
musculoskeletal agents, nasal agents, and nutritive agents; these accounted for 30 brand-name 
drugs sold in retail pharmacies. We identified therapeutic class information using information from 
Red Book, a compendium published by Truven Health Analytics. 
 
Manufacturer list price is the median average wholesale price—the list price manufacturers suggest 
wholesalers charge pharmacies for a drug. Pharmacy acquisition cost reflects prices reported in 
surveys of community retail pharmacies in the National Average Drug Acquisition Cost data set. 
Gross Part D prices reflect median unit prices paid to pharmacies by Part D plan sponsors, pharmacy 
benefit managers on the sponsor’s behalf, and the beneficiary and net Part D prices account for 
rebates and other price concessions obtained by plan sponsors for these drugs as reported in the 
direct and indirect remuneration data set. 
In contrast, there was little variation in both median gross and net prices 
across all therapeutic classes for brand-name drugs sold in specialty 
pharmacies. The range in median gross prices as a proportion of 
manufacturer list prices across the six therapeutic classes was 83 percent 
to 86 percent, and the range in median net prices as a proportion of 
manufacturer list prices was 80 percent to 84 percent.
7 
 
In 2016, discounts off of the manufacturer list price varied by whether the 
generic drug was sold in retail pharmacies or in specialty pharmacies. Of 
the 476 highest expenditure, highest utilization generic drugs in our 
analysis, the 367 sold in retail pharmacies had a median gross and net 
Part D price that were 66 percentage points lower than the manufacturer 
list price, and 13 percentage points higher than the pharmacy’s cost of 
acquiring the drugs.
8 
The 109 generic drugs sold in specialty pharmacies received far fewer 
discounts off of manufacturer list price than drugs sold in retail 
                                                                                                                       
7Four therapeutic classes accounted for approximately 71 percent of the 200 brand-name 
drugs sold in specialty pharmacies: 39 percent were antineoplastic agents; 12 percent 
were cardiovascular agents; 11 percent were immunological agents; and 11 percent were 
endocrine metabolic agents. Anti-infective agents, blood modifier agents, central nervous 
system agents, and respiratory agents each accounted for less than 10 percent of the 200 
drugs. We omitted one drug without a therapeutic class identified and the eight therapeutic 
classes with fewer than 10 drugs in the class from our analysis: blood modifier agents, 
dermatologic agents, diagnostic agents, gastrointestinal agents, genitourinary agents, 
musculoskeletal agents, respiratory agents, and antidotes.  
8Prices are the 2016 median prices for the generic drugs that met these criteria: the 200 
drugs with the highest expenditures, the 200 drugs with the highest utilization, and the 200 
drugs with the highest expenditures per 30-day prescription. We identified drugs that had 
common ingredients, strengths, dosages, and routes of administration. This resulted in a 
list of 476 unique brand-name drugs across the three groups, drugs some drugs met more 
than one criterion and, therefore, appeared in more than one group. 
Information on the Extent 
to Which Generic Part D 
Drugs Were Discounted 
Off Manufacturer List 
Prices 
===PAGE 64===
 
Appendix V: Information on Discounts Off 
Manufacturer List Prices for Brand-Name and 
Generic Medicare Part D Drugs 
 
 
 
 
Page 58 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
pharmacies. Median gross and net prices for those drugs sold in specialty 
pharmacies were both 26 percentage points lower than manufacturer list 
prices (see fig. 8). Therefore, generic drugs sold in retail pharmacies 
received median discounts (66 percent below manufacturer list prices) 
that were 2.5 times larger than those generic drugs sold in specialty 
pharmacies (26 percent below manufacturer list prices). 
Figure 8: Medicare Part D Drug Prices as a Percentage of Manufacturer List Prices 
for the Highest Expenditure, Highest Utilization Generic Drugs Sold in Retail and 
Specialty Pharmacies, 2016 
 
Notes: Generic drugs sold in retail pharmacies had a gross median per unit price of $0.64, while the 
gross median per unit price for generic drugs sold in specialty pharmacies was $22.66. 
Prices are the 2016 median prices for the generic drugs that met the following criteria: the 200 drugs 
with the highest expenditures, the 200 drugs with the highest utilization, and the 200 drugs with the 
highest expenditures per 30-day prescription. We identified drugs that had common ingredients, 
strengths, dose, and route of administration. This resulted in a group of 476 unique generic drugs 
across the three groups because some drugs met multiple criteria and appeared in more than one 
group. Of these 476 generic drugs, 367 were drugs sold in retail pharmacies and 109 were drugs sold 
in specialty pharmacies. 
Manufacturer list price is the median average wholesale price. Pharmacy acquisition cost reflects 
prices reported in surveys of community retail pharmacies in the National Average Drug Acquisition 

===PAGE 65===
 
Appendix V: Information on Discounts Off 
Manufacturer List Prices for Brand-Name and 
Generic Medicare Part D Drugs 
 
 
 
 
Page 59 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
Cost data set. Gross Part D prices reflect median unit prices paid to pharmacies by Part D plan 
sponsors, pharmacy benefit managers on the sponsor’s behalf, and the beneficiary and net Part D 
prices account for rebates and other price concessions obtained by plan sponsors for these drugs as 
reported in the direct and indirect remuneration data set. 
a
Pharmacy acquisition cost data are unavailable for drugs sold in specialty pharmacies, as these 
pharmacies are not surveyed by CMS. 
 
We also found pricing variation by whether the generic drugs were in the 
200 highest expenditure, 200 highest utilization group, or the 200 highest 
expenditures per utilization group. 
• Generic retail drugs. Of the 367 generic drugs sold in retail 
pharmacies, 200 were in the group of the 200 highest utilization 
generic drugs, 198 were in the group of the 200 highest expenditure 
generic drugs, and 91 were in the group of the 200 generic drugs with 
the highest expenditure per utilization.
9 We found that the gross Part 
D price for the highest utilization drugs was 14 percent of the 
manufacturer list price, while the gross price for the highest 
expenditure drugs was 34 percent of the manufacturer list price. 
However, the Part D gross price for the highest expenditure per 
utilization drugs was 63 percent of the manufacturer list price. The 
difference in gross and net Part D price as a percentage of 
manufacturer list price was one percentage point or less for all three 
groups of drugs (see table 9). 
• Generic specialty drugs. Of the 109 generic drugs sold in specialty 
pharmacies, none was in the group of the 200 highest utilization 
generic drugs, two were in the group of the 200 highest expenditure 
generic drugs, and all 109 were in the group of the 200 highest 
expenditure per utilization generic drugs.10 The gross Part D price for 
the highest expenditure per utilization drugs sold in specialty 
pharmacies was 74 percent of the manufacturer list price, and these 
drugs received no additional rebates and other price concessions. 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                       
9Drugs may be included in more than one of our three groups. For example, some drugs 
are included in both the group of 200 highest expenditure brand-name drugs sold in retail 
pharmacies and the group of 200 highest expenditure per utilization drugs. 
10The two generic drugs sold in specialty pharmacies that were in the group of 200 
highest expenditure generic drugs were also in the group of the 200 highest expenditure 
per utilization drugs.  
===PAGE 66===
 
Appendix V: Information on Discounts Off 
Manufacturer List Prices for Brand-Name and 
Generic Medicare Part D Drugs 
 
 
 
 
Page 60 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
Table 9: Medicare Part D Median Unit Drug Prices as a Percentage of Manufacturer List Prices for the Highest Expenditure, 
Highest Utilization Generic Drugs Sold in Retail and Specialty Pharmacies, 2016 
  Generic retail drugs as a percentage of manufacturer 
list price 
Generic specialty drugs as a percentage of manufacturer 
list price 
Count 
(number of 
drugs) 
Pharmacy 
acquisition cost 
(percent) 
Gross 
Part D 
price 
(percent) 
Net Part D 
Price 
(percent) 
Count  
(number of 
drugs) 
Pharmacy 
acquisition cost  
(percent)a 
Gross Part D 
price  
(percent) 
Net Part D 
price  
(percent) 
Median 200 
highest 
expenditure 
198 20 34 33 2 n/a n/ab n/ab 
Median 200 
highest 
utilization 
200 6 14 14 0 n/a n/ab n/ab 
Median 200 
highest 
expenditure 
per 
utilization 
91 60 63 62 109 n/a 74 74 
Legend: n/a = not applicable 
Source: GAO analysis of Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) data and data from Truven Health Analytics. | GAO-19-498 
Notes: Prices are the 2016 median prices for the generic drugs that met these criteria: the 200 drugs 
with the highest expenditures, the 200 drugs with the highest utilization, and the 200 drugs with the 
highest expenditures per 30-day prescription. We identified drugs that had common ingredients, 
strengths, dose, and route of administration. This resulted in a group of 476 unique generic drugs 
across the three groups because some drugs met multiple criteria and appeared in more than one 
group. Of these 476 generic drugs, 367 were drugs sold in retail pharmacies and 109 were drugs sold 
in specialty pharmacies. 
Manufacturer list price is the median average wholesale price. Pharmacy acquisition cost reflects 
prices reported in surveys of community retail pharmacies in the National Average Drug Acquisition 
Cost data set. Gross Part D prices reflect median unit prices paid to pharmacies by Part D plan 
sponsors, pharmacy benefit managers on the sponsor’s behalf, and the beneficiary and net Part D 
prices account for rebates and other price concessions obtained by plan sponsors for these drugs as 
reported in the direct and indirect remuneration data set. 
a
Pharmacy acquisition cost data are unavailable for drugs sold in specialty pharmacies, as these 
pharmacies are not surveyed by CMS. 
b
Only two of the highest expenditure generic drugs and none of the highest utilization generic drugs 
were sold in specialty pharmacies; therefore, we omitted pricing data for these drugs. 
 
There was variation in generic drug pricing across the eight therapeutic 
classes for generic drugs sold in retail pharmacies. Median gross Part D 
prices for generic retail drugs ranged from 14 percent of manufacturer list 
prices for cardiovascular agents to 56 percent of manufacturer list prices 
for dermatological agents (see table 10). However, there was little 
difference between in median gross and net Part D prices as a 
percentage of manufacturer list price for generic retail drugs in any 
===PAGE 67===
 
Appendix V: Information on Discounts Off 
Manufacturer List Prices for Brand-Name and 
Generic Medicare Part D Drugs 
 
 
 
 
Page 61 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
therapeutic class, with the percentage difference ranging from 0 percent 
to 2 percent.11 
Table 10: Medicare Part D Median Unit Drug Prices as a Percentage of Manufacturer List Prices by Therapeutic Class for the 
Highest Expenditure, Highest Utilization Generic Drugs Sold in Retail Pharmacies, 2016 
Therapeutic class Count Pharmacy acquisition 
cost (percent)  
Gross Part D price 
(percent) 
Net Part D price 
(percent) 
Central nervous system agent 127 17 30 29 
Cardiovascular agent  88 6 14 14 
Endocrine metabolic agent  33 46 54 52 
Anti-infective agent  22 43 51 51 
Gastrointestinal agent  20 32 46 45 
Dermatological agent  18 49 56 55 
Blood modifier agent  15 25 38 38 
Genitourinary agent  10 30 40 39 
Source: GAO analysis of Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) data and data from Truven Analytics. I GAO-19-498 
Notes: Prices are the 2016 median prices for the 367 generic drugs that were sold in retail 
pharmacies and were among the following three groups of drugs which included drugs sold in retail 
and specialty pharmacies: the 200 drugs with the highest expenditures, the 200 drugs with the 
highest utilization, and the 200 drugs with the highest expenditures per 30-day prescription. We 
identified drugs that had common ingredients, strengths, dose, and route of administration. This 
resulted in a group of 476 unique generic drugs across the three groups because some drugs met 
multiple criteria and appeared in more than one group. Of these 476 generic drugs, 367 were drugs 
sold in retail pharmacies and 109 were drugs sold in specialty pharmacies. 
We omitted one drug without therapeutic class information and the eight therapeutic classes in our 
analysis with fewer than 10 drugs in their class: antineoplastic agents, antidotes, immunologic agents, 
musculoskeletal agents, nasal agents, nutritive agents, ophthalmologic agents, and respiratory 
agents; these accounted for 33 generic drugs sold in retail pharmacies. We identified therapeutic 
class information using information from Red Book, a compendium published by Truven Health 
Analytics. 
Manufacturer list price is the median average wholesale price—the list price manufacturers suggest 
wholesalers charge pharmacies for a drug. Pharmacy acquisition cost reflects prices reported in 
surveys of community retail pharmacies in the National Average Drug Acquisition Cost data set. 
Gross Part D prices reflect median unit prices paid to pharmacies by Part D plan sponsors, pharmacy 
benefit managers on the sponsor’s behalf, and the beneficiary and net Part D prices account for 
rebates and other price concessions obtained by plan sponsors for these drugs as reported in the 
direct and indirect remuneration data set. 
 
There was little variation in median gross and net prices across the 
therapeutic classes for generic drugs sold in specialty pharmacies. The 
                                                                                                                       
11We omitted one drug without therapeutic class information and the eight therapeutic 
classes in our analysis with fewer than 10 drugs in their class: antineoplastic agents, 
antidotes, immunologic agents, musculoskeletal agents, nasal agents, nutritive agents, 
ophthalmologic agents, respiratory agents; these accounted for 33 generic drugs sold in 
retail pharmacies.  
===PAGE 68===
 
Appendix V: Information on Discounts Off 
Manufacturer List Prices for Brand-Name and 
Generic Medicare Part D Drugs 
 
 
 
 
Page 62 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
range in median gross prices as a percentage of manufacturer list prices 
was 73 to 75 percent (see table 11). There was little difference between 
median gross and Part D net prices as a percentage of manufacturer list 
price, with the percentage difference between median gross and net 
prices 1 percent or less for all classes.
12 
Table 11: Medicare Part D Median Unit Drug Prices as a Percentage of Manufacturer List Prices by Therapeutic Class for the 
Highest Expenditure, Highest Utilization Generic Drugs Sold in Specialty Pharmacies, 2016 
Therapeutic class Count Pharmacy 
acquisition costa 
Gross Part D price 
(percent) 
Net Part D price 
(percent) 
Anti-infective agent 42 n/a 73 72 
Central nervous system agent  27 n/a 75 75 
Antineoplastic agent  16 n/a 74 74 
Legend: n/a = not applicable 
Source: GAO analysis of Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) data and data from Truven Analytics. I GAO-19-498 
Notes: Prices are the 2016 median prices for the 109 generic drugs that were sold in specialty 
pharmacies and were among the following three groups of drugs which included drugs sold in retail 
and specialty pharmacies: the 200 drugs with the highest expenditures, the 200 drugs with the 
highest utilization, and the 200 drugs with the highest expenditures per 30-day prescription. We 
identified drugs that had common ingredient, strengths, dose, and route of administration. This 
resulted in a group of 476 unique generic drugs across the three groups because some drugs met 
multiple criteria and appeared in more than one group. Of these 476 generic drugs, 367 were drugs 
sold in retail pharmacies and 109 were drugs sold in specialty pharmacies. 
We omitted the 9 therapeutic classes in our analysis with fewer than 10 drugs in their class: antidotes, 
blood modifier agents, cardiovascular agents, dermatological agents, endocrine metabolic agents, 
gastrointestinal agents, immunological agents, nutritive agents, and respiratory agents; these 
accounted for 24 generic drugs sold in specialty pharmacies. We identified therapeutic class 
information using information from Red Book, a compendium published by Truven Health Analytics. 
Manufacturer list price is the median average wholesale price—the list price manufacturers suggest 
wholesalers charge pharmacies for a drug. Pharmacy acquisition cost reflects prices reported in 
surveys of community retail pharmacies in the National Average Drug Acquisition Cost data set. 
Gross Part D prices reflect median unit prices paid to pharmacies by Part D plan sponsors, pharmacy 
benefit managers on the sponsor’s behalf, and the beneficiary and net Part D prices account for 
rebates and other price concessions obtained by plan sponsors for these drugs as reported in the 
direct and indirect remuneration data set. 
a
Pharmacy acquisition cost data are unavailable for drugs sold in specialty pharmacies, as they are 
not surveyed by CMS. 
                                                                                                                       
12We omitted the nine therapeutic classes in our analysis with fewer than 10 drugs in their 
class: antidotes, blood modifier agents, cardiovascular agents, dermatological agents, 
endocrine metabolic agents, gastrointestinal agents, immunological agents, nutritive 
agents, and respiratory agents; these accounted for 24 generic drugs sold in specialty 
pharmacies. 
===PAGE 69===
 
Appendix VI: Studies and Stakeholders’ Views 
on Effects of Utilization Management Services 
 
 
 
 
Page 63 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
This appendix contains additional details on our review of 52 peer-
reviewed studies on the effects of utilization management services on (1) 
financial savings, (2) beneficiary health indicators, and (3) beneficiary 
medication adherence and access, as well as stakeholders’ views on 
these effects. 
 
Of the 36 studies that examined the effect of utilization management 
services on financial savings, 18 examined medication therapy 
management programs and eight examined generic substitution.
1 The 
two groups of studies found the following: 
• Medication therapy management programs or comprehensive 
medical reviews. Thirteen of the 18 studies that examined the 
relationship between a medication therapy management program or 
comprehensive medical review and financial savings found an 
increase in savings.2 For example, one study found that a medication 
therapy management program conducted by telephone decreased 
beneficiary drug costs by $682 per beneficiary for participants, 
compared to an increase of $119 for those not in the program.
3 
• Generic and therapeutic substitution and generic dispensing 
rate. Of the 8 studies that examined the relationship between generic 
and therapeutic substitution and financial savings, all found an 
                                                                                                                       
1The other 10 studies examined the effect of various combinations of step therapy, prior 
authorization and medicine quantity limits on financial savings. Six of these studies found 
an increase in financial savings and four found no impact, a mixed impact, or a decrease 
in financial savings.  
2The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) requires medication therapy 
management programs for covered drugs furnished through a Part D plan. These 
programs are generally designed to reduce the risk of adverse drug events through 
discussion with targeted beneficiaries and prescriber intervention. A comprehensive 
medical review is a systematic process of assessing medications to identify problems, 
such as a change in a drug’s effect when taken with another drug, and creating a plan to 
resolve them. 
3L.R. Moczygemba, J. C. Barner, J. C. Brannier, and E. R. Gabrillo, “Outcomes of a 
Medicare Part D Telephone Medication Therapy Management Program,” Journal of the 
American Pharmacists Association, vol. 52, no. 6 (2012): e144-e152. Nonparticipants in 
the program were matched to medication therapy management program participants by 
the beneficiary’s number of chronic diseases and Part D drugs. Because this study reports 
outcomes from a regional Part D telephone medication therapy management program, the 
results may not be generalizable to all Part D plans or face-to-face medication therapy 
management programs.  
Appendix VI: Studies and Stakeholders’ 
Views on Effects of Utilization Management 
Services 
Effect of Utilization 
Management Services on 
Financial Savings 
===PAGE 70===
 
Appendix VI: Studies and Stakeholders’ Views 
on Effects of Utilization Management Services 
 
 
 
 
Page 64 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
increase in savings.4 For example, a 2013 study examined the 
potential financial savings to beneficiaries and Part D plan sponsors of 
generic and therapeutic substitution of commonly prescribed drugs.5 
The study estimated that in 2007, generic and therapeutic 
substitutions could have resulted in an average annual savings of 
$127 and $389 per person, respectively.6 
 
Additionally, eight of these 36 studies examined the generic dispensing 
rate, and all eight found that utilization management led to an increase in 
the rate.7 The generic dispensing rate—the percent of prescriptions 
dispensed with a generic drug instead of a brand-name drug—represents 
a source of financial savings through a reduction in the use of brand-
name drugs, which are generally more expensive than generics. For 
example, a 2017 study analyzed 2012 Part D data to examine the impact 
of prior authorization and step therapy on generic use among low-income 
subsidy beneficiaries.8 This study found that those randomly assigned to 
                                                                                                                       
4Studies generally calculated potential savings by estimating the difference between the 
amount paid for brand-name drugs with the amount that would have been paid if generic 
drugs had been used. 
5O.K. Duru, S. L. Ettner, N. Turk, C. M. Mangione, A. F. Brown, J. Fu, L. Simien, and C.W. 
Tseng, “Potential Savings Associated with Drug Substitution in Medicare Part D: The 
Translating Research Into Action for Diabetes (TRIAD) Study,” Journal of General Internal 
Medicine, vol. 29, no. 1 (2014): 230-236. Generic substitution is switching a generic drug 
for its bioequivalent, brand-name counterpart. Therapeutic substitution is switching a 
generic drug for a brand-name drug that is not bioequivalent but is within the same 
therapeutic class.  
6The authors noted this study may overestimate potential savings as it assumes that all 
beneficiaries make every substitution, which in the case of therapeutic substitution is not 
always medically appropriate. 
7Of the eight studies, three looked at the effect of medication therapy management, two 
looked at step therapy, and three looked at the effect of both prior authorization and step 
therapy. The generic dispensing rate was generally measured as annual days of supply 
for generics divided by annual total days of supply for all drugs in the class. 
8X. Shen, B. C. Stuart, C. A. Powers, S. E. Tom, L. S. Magder, and E. M. Perfetto, “Impact 
of Formulary Restrictions on Medication Use and Costs,” The American Journal of 
Managed Care, vol. 23, no. 8 (2017): e265-e274. Low-income subsidy beneficiaries with 
annual incomes under 135 percent of the federal poverty level, and who meet other 
criteria, qualify for a 100 percent premium subsidy and reduced cost sharing, among other 
cost reductions. Prior authorization is a requirement that beneficiaries obtain approval for 
a drug by the pharmacy benefit manager or plan before obtaining the drug if it is to be 
covered by the plan. Step therapy is a requirement where more expensive drugs are 
covered only if beneficiaries try less expensive alternatives first and find them not to be 
effective. 
===PAGE 71===
 
Appendix VI: Studies and Stakeholders’ Views 
on Effects of Utilization Management Services 
 
 
 
 
Page 65 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
a plan using both prior authorization and step therapy had an increased 
generic dispensing rate of 3 to 15 percentage points for all three classes 
of drugs examined. 
 
Twelve of the 20 studies that examined beneficiary health indicators 
found that utilization management services were associated with 
improved indicators, while the other eight found a mixed impact, no 
impact, or a decline.9 Examples of studies that looked at the association 
of utilization management services with beneficiary health indicators 
include: 
• A study analyzing data from three Part D plan sponsors, which found 
there was a nearly 50 percent reduction in the use of potentially 
harmful drugs by beneficiaries 6 months after the implementation of a 
retrospective drug utilization review program.10 
• A randomized trial of medication therapy management for Part D 
beneficiaries found a nearly 60 percent reduction in beneficiaries’ drug 
therapy problems over time among two groups after the medication 
therapy management intervention.
11 
 
                                                                                                                       
9Studies used a range of health indicators, including reducing medications inappropriate 
for older adults, improved cholesterol values, and reductions in adverse drug events. 
10C.I. Starner, S. A. Norman, R. G. Reynolds, and P. P. Gleason, “Effect of a 
Retrospective Drug Utilization Review on Potentially Inappropriate Prescribing in the 
Elderly,” The American Journal of Geriatric Pharmacotherapy, vol. 7, no. 1 (2009): 11-19. 
This study did not use a control group, so the results may not be interpreted as the causal 
effect of the utilization management service. A drug utilization review program is a 
concurrent examination by the pharmacy benefit manager and plan sponsor of 
prescriptions at the time of purchase by the beneficiary to assess safety considerations, 
such as potential adverse interactions, and compliance with clinical guidelines (including 
quantity and dose). 
11The study examined Part D beneficiaries at three academic medical center community 
pharmacies and family medical clinics at three sites between December 2007 and January 
2010. Examples of drug therapy problems include: incorrect dose, drug interactions, or 
taking the wrong drug for a beneficiary’s condition. D.R. Touchette, A. L. Masica, R. J. 
Dolor, G. T. Schumock, Y. K. Choi, Y. Kim, and S. R. Smith, “Safety-Focused Medication 
Therapy Management: A Randomized Controlled Trial,” Journal of the American 
Pharmacists Association, vol. 52, no. 5 (2012): 603-612. 
Effect of Utilization 
Management Services on 
Beneficiary Health 
Indicators 
===PAGE 72===
 
Appendix VI: Studies and Stakeholders’ Views 
on Effects of Utilization Management Services 
 
 
 
 
Page 66 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
Fifteen studies examined the effect of utilization management services on 
beneficiary medication adherence and access. Seven of the 10 studies 
that examined the effect of either medication therapy management 
programs or comprehensive medication reviews on beneficiaries’ 
medication adherence (taking medication as prescribed) found 
improvement.12 For example, a 2016 study used data from Part D and the 
U.S. Renal Data System to examine the relationship of medication 
therapy management eligibility with immunosuppressant drug adherence 
12 months after beneficiaries received a kidney transplant.13 The study 
found that medication therapy management-eligible transplant recipients 
were 14 percent more likely to have improved adherence than transplant 
recipients who were not eligible. The other three studies that examined 
medication therapy management programs or comprehensive medication 
reviews found no statistically significant impact on adherence. 
The effect of two other utilization management services—prior 
authorization and step therapy—on beneficiary medication adherence 
and access (the ability to obtain clinically indicated prescriptions) is 
unclear, according to the studies we reviewed.14 The two studies that 
examined the relationship of prior authorization and step therapy with 
adherence both found a mixed impact. For example, one study examined 
the impact of a health plan requiring either prior authorization or step 
                                                                                                                       
12Studies varied by the design of the programs and the definitions of medication 
adherence. For example, studies had varying eligibility criteria for participation—some 
used opt-in enrollment (eligible beneficiaries must choose to participate), while others 
used opt-out enrollment (eligible beneficiaries are automatically enrolled unless they 
decline to participate). Studies also used various measures of adherence, such as surveys 
of beneficiaries who reported if they stopped their medications. Other studies measured 
adherence using the medication possession ratio—the proportion of days’ supply obtained 
during a time period, and considered beneficiaries above a certain proportion of days 
covered (e.g., 75 percent) as adherent. 
13M.A. Chisholm-Burns, C. A. Spivey, E. A. Tolley, and E. K. Kaplan, “Medication Therapy 
Management and Adherence among US Renal Transplant Recipients,” Patient Preference 
and Adherence, vol.10 (2016): 703-709. Immunosuppressant adherence was defined as a 
medication possession ratio of at least 80 percent. 
14Studies used various measures of access, such as the time for medications to receive 
prior authorization approval or surveys of physicians on whether their patients were 
unable to access needed medications. Also, some studies calculated the combined effect 
of prior authorization and step therapy and others examined them individually. 
Effect of Utilization 
Management Services on 
Beneficiary Medication 
Adherence and Access 
===PAGE 73===
 
Appendix VI: Studies and Stakeholders’ Views 
on Effects of Utilization Management Services 
 
 
 
 
Page 67 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
therapy on medication use among dual-eligible nursing home residents.15 
The study found that some residents whose new plan required prior 
authorization or step therapy for their current medication were more likely 
to have gaps in medication use than those without for two of six classes 
of drugs in 2006, but no gaps for any of the classes for in 2007 and 
2008.16 
The two studies that examined the relationship of prior authorization and 
step therapy with access found an increase in medication access 
problems, but they did not focus exclusively on the Medicare population.17 
For example, one study used 2006 data from a random sample of 
psychiatrists surveyed about their patients to examine the relationship of 
prior authorization and step therapy with medication access problems 
among dual-eligible psychiatric patients. The study found that patients in 
plans with prior authorization and step therapy requirements were 2.8 and 
1.8 times more likely, respectively, to have experienced medication 
access problems than patients in plans without these requirements.
18 This 
study examined the transition of dual-eligible beneficiaries from Medicaid 
drug coverage to Medicare Part D when the program began in 2006, so 
the results may not be generalizable to the entire Medicare population at 
present. 
 
                                                                                                                       
15Dual-eligible beneficiaries are eligible for both Medicare and Medicaid. H.A. Huskamp, 
D. G. Stevenson, A. J. O’Malley, S. B. Dusetzina, S. L. Mitchell, B. J. Zarowitz, M. E. 
Chernew, and J. P. Newhouse, “Medicare Part D Plan Generosity and Medication Use 
among Dual-Eligible Nursing Home Residents,” Medical Care, vol. 51, no. 10 (2013): 894-
900.  
16The two classes that were more likely to have gaps in medication use for some 
residents were antipsychotics and opioids. The other four classes of drugs were 
angiotensin receptor blockers, cholinesterase inhibitors, osteoporosis medications, and 
antidepressants. 
17Another study that examined the relationship of only prior authorization with the time 
needed to access medications found no clinically significant impact. 
18J.C. West, J. E. Wilk, D. S. Rae, I. L. Muszynski, M. Rubio-Stipec, C. L. Alter, K. E. 
Sanders, S. Crystal, and D. A. Regier, “First-Year Medicare Part D Prescription Drug 
Benefits: Medication Access and Continuity among Dual Eligible Psychiatric Patients,” The 
Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, vol. 71, no. 4 (2010): 400-410.  
===PAGE 74===
 
Appendix VI: Studies and Stakeholders’ Views 
on Effects of Utilization Management Services 
 
 
 
 
Page 68 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
Most representatives of pharmacy benefit managers (PBM), Part D plan 
sponsors, and a manufacturer trade association we interviewed generally 
agreed that utilization management services resulted in financial savings 
by requiring the use of generic drugs. Representatives of 10 of 14 plan 
sponsors and six of eight PBMs we interviewed stated that utilization 
management services generally resulted in financial savings.
19 
Representatives of one Part D plan sponsor stated that its utilization 
management services resulted in annual savings of approximately 3 
percent. 
However, representatives of one Part D plan sponsor and one PBM noted 
that not all utilization management services result in savings. For 
example, they noted that improving care with medication therapy 
management programs may increase drug costs through increased 
utilization. Additionally, representatives of one Part D plan sponsor noted 
the savings from utilization management services in commercial plans 
may be greater than in Part D because the use of manufacturers’ copay 
coupons are prohibited in federal health care programs, including Part 
D.20 While the coupons reduce or eliminate beneficiaries’ out-of-pocket 
co-payments for certain brand-name drugs, thereby encouraging their 
use, the coupons do not affect the amount that the plans pay for drugs. 
Therefore, to the extent that beneficiaries in their commercial plans use 
coupons, Part D plan sponsors have a greater incentive to employ 
utilization management services in these plans to reduce the use of more 
expensive brand-name drugs. 
Representatives of Part D plan sponsors and PBMs we interviewed 
differed with manufacturers and, in some cases, with each other on the 
effects of utilization management services on various non-financial 
aspects of drug utilization: 
• Beneficiary health. Representatives from all three manufacturers we 
interviewed stated that utilization management services negatively 
                                                                                                                       
19An industry-sponsored study provided to us by a PBM estimated that in 2018, PBMs 
would save the Part D program $19 billion (or $35.15 per member per month) by 
promoting the use of generic drugs. Actuarial Practice of Oliver Wyman, commissioned by 
the Glover Park Group on behalf of the Coalition for Affordable Prescription Drugs, 
Savings Generated By Pharmacy Benefit Managers in the Medicare Part D Program 
(June 2017). The study did not specify how the financial savings from the estimated 5 
percent increase in the generic dispensing rate due to PBMs was calculated.  
2042 U.S.C. § 1320a-7b.  
Stakeholder Perspectives 
on the Effect of Utilization 
Management on Financial 
Savings, Beneficiary 
Health, Medication 
Adherence and Access to 
Clinically Appropriate 
Medications 
===PAGE 75===
 
Appendix VI: Studies and Stakeholders’ Views 
on Effects of Utilization Management Services 
 
 
 
 
Page 69 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
affected beneficiary health by reducing their access to necessary 
medications. In contrast, seven of the 11 Part D plan sponsors and 
four of the five PBMs that discussed the effect of utilization 
management services on beneficiary health stated that utilization 
management services generally resulted in improved beneficiary 
health.21 Representatives of certain PBMs and one Part D plan 
sponsor provided us examples of the ways utilization management 
services have improved their beneficiaries’ health, such as through 
opioid quantity limits. One Part D plan sponsor noted that point-of-sale 
utilization management services warn pharmacies of therapeutic 
duplications, toxicities across multiple prescriptions, or interactions of 
certain drugs with health conditions. 
• Medication access. Representatives from all three drug 
manufacturers noted that utilization management services impose 
limits on beneficiaries’ access to drugs, while seven of nine Part D 
plan sponsors and three of the four PBMs who discussed this stated 
utilization management services had no significant restrictions on 
beneficiaries’ access to necessary medications. Representatives from 
one plan sponsor noted there are appeals processes to ensure 
beneficiaries’ access is not adversely impacted by utilization 
management services.  
• Medication adherence. Representatives from all three manufacturers 
told us that utilization management services limit beneficiaries’ 
adherence to their medications, such as by causing delays in therapy, 
while seven of eight Part D plan sponsors and all four PBMs who 
discussed this stated utilization management services had no adverse 
impact on beneficiaries’ adherence to their medications. 
Representatives from one plan sponsor and two PBMs stated that 
utilization management services may have a positive impact on 
adherence, such as by lowering copays through generic substitution. 
• Medicare protected classes and utilization management. 
Representatives from Part D plan sponsors, PBMs, and 
manufacturers differed in their views on the effect of Part D utilization 
management services restrictions on protected class drugs on 
beneficiary health. Representatives of two PBMs told us the effect 
was positive, as beneficiaries who use these drugs do not experience 
disruptions in therapy. Representatives of two other PBMs said there 
was no effect, and one said there was a negative effect—as plan 
                                                                                                                       
21Representatives we interviewed from four other Part D plan sponsors and one PBM said 
utilization management services have no effect on beneficiaries’ health. 
===PAGE 76===
 
Appendix VI: Studies and Stakeholders’ Views 
on Effects of Utilization Management Services 
 
 
 
 
Page 70 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
sponsors were required to cover certain less effective drugs. 
Representatives of one PBM said that, for example, patients in 
commercial health plans do not have any problems accessing 
protected class drugs that are subject to utilization management. 
These representatives noted that the Centers for Medicare & 
Medicaid Services provides for adequate access. However, one 
manufacturer told us that utilization management services for HIV 
drugs are rightly restricted in Part D, as these services may cause 
disruptions in therapy, which can lead to drug resistance and poorer 
health outcomes. 
 
Representatives of five Part D plan sponsors said Medicare’s restrictions 
on the use of utilization management services for protected class drugs 
have had a negative impact on beneficiary health because, for example, 
they limit plans’ ability to ensure that a prescribed drug is appropriate, 
such as ensuring that a cancer drug is appropriate for a beneficiary’s 
weight. Another plan sponsor representative told us the restrictions may 
have a positive impact by reducing increases in medical costs, while 
another plan sponsor said the restrictions have had no impact. 
===PAGE 77===
 
Appendix VII: Bibliography of Peer Reviewed 
Studies Used in GAO’s Literature Review 
 
 
 
 
Page 71 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
Abbass, I. M., E. O. Caplan, D. B. Ng, R. Kristy, C. R. Schermer, P. Bradt, 
J. M. Collins, W. Man, M. Chan, and B. T. Suehs. “Impact of Overactive 
Bladder Step Therapy Policies on Medication Utilization and Expenditures 
among Treated Medicare Members.” Journal of Managed Care & 
Specialty Pharmacy, vol. 23, no. 1 (2017): 27-37. 
Agarwal, A., R. A. Freedman, F. Goicuria, C. Rhinehart, K. Murphy, E. 
Kelly, E. Mullaney, M. St. Amand, P. Nguyen, and N. U. Lin. “Prior 
Authorization for Medications in a Breast Oncology Practice: Navigation 
of a Complex Process.” Journal of Oncology Practice, vol. 13, no. 4 
(2017): e273-e282. 
Almodovar, A. S., D. R. Axon, A. M. Coleman, T. Warholak, and M. C. 
Nahata. “The Effect of Plan Type and Comprehensive Medication 
Reviews on High-Risk Medication Use.” Journal of Managed Care & 
Specialty Pharmacy, vol. 24, no. 5 (2018): 416-422. 
Alston, G., and C. Hanrahan. “Can a Pharmacist Reduce Annual Costs 
for Medicare Part D Enrollees?” The Consultant Pharmacist, vol. 26, no. 3 
(2011): 182-189. 
Ben-Joseph, R., C.C. Chen, A. P. De, R.L. Wade, and D. Shah. 
“Consequences of Patient Access Restrictions to Branded Oxycodone 
Hydrochloride Extended-Release Tablets on Healthcare Utilization and 
Costs in US Health Plans.” Journal of Medical Economics, vol. 17, no. 10 
(2014): 708-718. 
Bergeson, J. G., K. Worley, A. Louder, M. Ward, and J. Graham. 
“Retrospective Database Analysis of the Impact of Prior Authorization for 
Type 2 Diabetes Medications on Health Care Costs in a Medicare 
Advantage Prescription Drug Plan Population.” Journal of Managed Care 
Pharmacy, vol. 19, no. 5 (2013): 374-384. 
Bloudek, L. M., D. Makenbaeva, and M. Eaddy. “Anticipated Impact of 
Generic Imatinib Market Entry on the Costs of Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors.” 
American Health & Drug Benefits, vol. 8, no. 9 (2015): 472-480. 
Branham, A., J. Moose, and S. Ferrari. “Retrospective Analysis of 
Medication Adherence and Cost Following Medication Therapy 
Management.” Innovation in Pharmacy, vol. 1, no. 1 (2010): 1-8. 
 
Appendix VII: Bibliography of Peer Reviewed 
Studies Used in GAO’s Literature Review 
===PAGE 78===
 
Appendix VII: Bibliography of Peer Reviewed 
Studies Used in GAO’s Literature Review 
 
 
 
 
Page 72 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
Branham, A. R., A. J. Katz, J. S. Moose, S. P. Ferreri, J. F. Farley, and M. 
W. Marciniak. “Retrospective Analysis of Estimated Cost Avoidance 
Following Pharmacist-Provided Medication Therapy Management 
Services.” Journal of Pharmacy Practice, vol. 26, no. 4 (2013): 420-427. 
Buhl, A., J. Augustine, A. M. Taylor, R. Martin, and T. L. Warholak. 
“Positive Medication Changes Resulting from Comprehensive and 
Noncomprehensive Medication Reviews in a Medicare Part D 
Population.” Journal of Managed Care & Specialty Pharmacy, vol. 23, no. 
3 (2017): 388-394. 
Caffiero, N., T. Delate, M. D. Ehizuelen, and K. Vogel. “Effectiveness of a 
Clinical Pharmacist Medication Therapy Management Program in 
Discontinuation of Drugs to Avoid in the Elderly.” Journal of Managed 
Care & Specialty Pharmacy, vol. 23, no. 5 (2017): 525-531. 
Caplan, E. O., M. C. Guy, J. Chang, and K. Boesen. “Telephone-Based 
Cardiovascular Medication Therapy Management in Medicare Part D 
Enrollees with Diabetes.” The American Journal of Pharmacy Benefits, 
vol. 9, no. 2 (2017): 47-54. 
Chinthammit, C., E. P. Armstrong, K. Boesen, R. Martin, A. M. Taylor, 
and T. Warholak. “Cost-Effectiveness of Comprehensive Medication 
Reviews Versus Noncomprehensive Medication Review Interventions and 
Subsequent Successful Medication Changes in a Medicare Part D 
Population.” Journal of Managed Care & Specialty Pharmacy, vol. 21, no. 
5 (2015): 381-389. 
Chisholm-Burns, M. A., C. A. Spivey, E. A. Tolley, and E. K. Kaplan. 
“Medication Therapy Management and Adherence among US Renal 
Transplant Recipients.” Patient Preference and Adherence, vol.10 (2016): 
703-709. 
Corsi, K., V. Lemay, K. K. Orr, and L. Cohen. “Pharmacist Medication 
Therapy Management in Home Health Care: Investigation of a 
Sustainable Practice Model.” Journal of the American Pharmacists 
Association, vol. 58, no. 4S (2018): S64-S68. 
Dai, R. and J. Robst. “The Relationship between Plan Characteristics and 
Medicare Prescription Drug Plan Bids.” Applied Economics Letters, vol. 
19, no. 1 (2012): 99-104. 
===PAGE 79===
 
Appendix VII: Bibliography of Peer Reviewed 
Studies Used in GAO’s Literature Review 
 
 
 
 
Page 73 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
De Lott, L. B., J. F. Burke, K. A. Kerber, L. E. Skolarus, and B. C. 
Callaghan. “Medicare Part D Payments for Neurologist-Prescribed 
Drugs.” Neurology, vol. 86, no. 16 (2016): 1491-1498. 
Dodson, S. E., J. F. Ruisinger, P. A. Howard, S. E. Hare, and B. J. 
Barnes. “Community Pharmacy-Based Medication Therapy Management 
Services: Financial Impact for Patients.” Pharmacy Practice, vol. 10, no. 3 
(2012): 119-124. 
Duru, O. K., S. L. Ettner, N. Turk, C. M. Mangione, A. F. Brown, J. Fu, L. 
Simien, and C.W. Tseng. “Potential Savings Associated with Drug 
Substitution in Medicare Part D: The Translating Research Into Action for 
Diabetes (TRIAD) Study.” Journal of General Internal Medicine, vol. 29, 
no. 1 (2014): 230-236. 
Egilman, A. C., J. D. Wallach, J. S. Ross, and S. S. Dhruva. “Medicare 
Spending and Potential Savings on Brand-Name Drugs with Available 
Generic Substitutes Excluded by 2 Large Pharmacy Benefit Managers, 
2012 through 2015.” JAMA Internal Medicine, vol. 178, no. 4 (2018): 567-
569. 
Fox, D., L. D. Ried, G. E. Klein, W. Myers, and K. Foli. “A Medication 
Therapy Management Program’s Impact on Low-Density Lipoprotein 
Cholesterol Goal Attainment in Medicare Part D Patients with Diabetes.” 
Journal of the American Pharmacists Association, vol. 49, no. 2 (2009): 
192-199. 
Gellad, W. F., J. M. Donohue, X. Zhao, M. K. Mor, C. T. Thorpe, J. Smith, 
C. B. Good, M. J. Fine, and N. E. Morden. “Brand-Name Prescription 
Drug Use among Veterans Affairs and Medicare Part D Patients with 
Diabetes: A National Cohort Comparison.” Annals of Internal Medicine, 
vol. 159, no. 2 (2013): 105-114. 
Gernant, S. A., M. E. Snyder, H. Jaynes, J. M. Sutherland, and A. J. 
Zillich. “The Effectiveness of Pharmacist-Provided Telephonic Medication 
Therapy Management on Emergency Department Utilization in Home 
Health Patients.” Journal of Pharmacy Technology, vol. 32, no. 5 (2016): 
179-184. 
Gold, J. A., B. French, and L. C. Vermeulen. “Reduction of Use of 
Potentially Inappropriate Medications in the Elderly.” Wisconsin Medical 
Journal, vol. 107, no. 4 (2008): 213-214. 
===PAGE 80===
 
Appendix VII: Bibliography of Peer Reviewed 
Studies Used in GAO’s Literature Review 
 
 
 
 
Page 74 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
Hoadley, J. F., K. Merrell, E. Hargrave, and L. Summer. “In Medicare Part 
D Plans, Low or Zero Copays and Other Features to Encourage the Use 
of Generic Statins Work, Could Save Billions.” Health Affairs, vol. 31, no. 
10 (2012): 2266-75. 
Hui, R. L., B. D. Yamada, M. M. Spence, E. W. Jeong, and J. Chan. 
“Impact of a Medicare MTM Program: Evaluating Clinical and Economic 
Outcomes.” The American Journal of Managed Care, vol. 20, no. 2 
(2014): e43-e51. 
Huskamp, H. A., D. G. Stevenson, A. J. O’Malley, S. B. Dusetzina, S. L. 
Mitchell, B. J. Zarowitz, M. E. Chernew, and J. P. Newhouse. “Medicare 
Part D Plan Generosity and Medication Use among Dual-Eligible Nursing 
Home Residents.” Medical Care, vol. 51, no. 10 (2013): 894-900. 
Moczygemba, L. R., J. C. Barner, J. C. Brannier, and E. R. Gabrillo. 
“Outcomes of a Medicare Part D Telephone Medication Therapy 
Management Program.” Journal of the American Pharmacists 
Association, vol. 52, no. 6 (2012): e144-e152. 
Moczygemba, L. R., J. C. Barner, K. A. Lawson, C. M. Brown, E. R. 
Gabrillo, P. Godley, and M. Johnsrud. “Impact of Telephone Medication 
Therapy Management on Medication and Health-Related Problems, 
Medication Adherence, and Medicare Part D Drug Costs: A 6-Month 
Follow Up.” The American Journal of Geriatric Pharmacotherapy, vol. 9, 
no. 5 (2011): 328-338. 
Moore, J. M., D. Shartle, L. Faudskar, O.S. Matlin, and T.A. Brennan. 
Impact of a Patient-Centered Pharmacy Program and Intervention in a 
High-Risk Group. Journal of Managed Care Pharmacy, vol. 19, no. 3 
(2013): 228-236. 
Newman-Casey, P. A., M. A. Woodward, L. M. Niziol, P. P. Lee, and L. B. 
De Lott. “Brand Medications and Medicare Part D: How Eye Care 
Providers’ Prescribing Patterns Influence Costs.” Ophthalmology, vol. 
125, no. 3 (2018): 332-339. 
Null, K. D., K. Moll, A. Sadosky, M. K. Pasquale, J. C. Cappelleri, and B. 
Parsons. “Trends Associated with Implementing and Lifting a Pregabalin 
Step Therapy Policy.” American Journal of Pharmacy Benefits, vol. 8, no. 
2 (2016): e17-e24. 
===PAGE 81===
 
Appendix VII: Bibliography of Peer Reviewed 
Studies Used in GAO’s Literature Review 
 
 
 
 
Page 75 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
Olvey, E. L., M. C. Guy, J. Chang, and G. H. Skrepnek. “Cost-
Effectiveness of Medication Therapy Management in Part D Diabetic 
Enrollees.” American Journal of Pharmacy Benefits, vol. 6, no. 5 (2014): 
e147-e156. 
Pai, A.B., A. Boyd, J. Depczynski, I.M. Chavez, N. Khan, and H. Manley. 
Reduced Drug Use and Hospitalization Rates in Patients Undergoing 
Hemodialysis Who Received Pharmaceutical Care: A 2-Year, 
Randomized, Controlled Study. Pharmacotherapy, vol. 29, no. 12 (2009): 
1433-1440. 
Patel, R. A., M. P. Walberg, E. Tong, F. Tan, A. E. Rummel, J. A. Woelfel, 
S. M. Carr-Lopez, and S. M. Galal. “Cost Variability of Suggested Generic 
Treatment Alternatives under the Medicare Part D Benefit.” Journal of 
Managed Care Pharmacy, vol. 20, no. 3 (2014): 283-290. 
Pindolia, V. K., L. Stebelsky, T. M. Romain, L. Luoma, S. N. Nowak, and 
F. Gillanders. “Mitigation of Medication Mishaps via Medication Therapy 
Management.” The Annals of Pharmacotherapy, vol. 43, no. 4 (2009): 
611-620. 
Shen, X., B. C. Stuart, C. A. Powers, S. E. Tom, L. S. Magder, and E. M. 
Perfetto. “Impact of Formulary Restrictions on Medication Use and 
Costs.” The American Journal of Managed Care, vol. 23, no. 8 (2017): 
e265-e274. 
Starner, C. I., S. A. Norman, R. G. Reynolds, and P. P. Gleason. “Effect 
of a Retrospective Drug Utilization Review on Potentially Inappropriate 
Prescribing in the Elderly.” The American Journal of Geriatric 
Pharmacotherapy, vol. 7, no. 1 (2009): 11-19. 
Stebbins, M.R., D.J. Kaufman, and H.L. Lipton. “The PRICE Clinic for 
Low-Income Elderly: A Managed Care Model for Implementing 
Pharmacist-Directed Services.” Journal of Managed Care Pharmacy, vol. 
11, no. 4 (2005): 333–341. 
Steele, K. M., J. F. Ruisinger, J. Bates, E. S. Prohaska, B. L. Melton, and 
S. Hipp. “Home-Based Comprehensive Medication Reviews: 
Pharmacist’s Impact on Drug Therapy Problems in Geriatric Patients.” 
The Consultant Pharmacist, vol. 31, no. 10 (2016): 598-605. 
Stockl, K. M., D. Tjioe, S. Gong, J. Stroup, A. S. M. Harada, and H. C. 
Lew. “Effect of an Intervention to Increase Statin Use in Medicare 
===PAGE 82===
 
Appendix VII: Bibliography of Peer Reviewed 
Studies Used in GAO’s Literature Review 
 
 
 
 
Page 76 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
Members Who Qualified for a Medication Therapy Management 
Program.” Journal of Managed Care Pharmacy, vol. 14, no. 6 (2008): 
532-540. 
Suehs, B. T., A. Louder, M. Udall, J. C. Cappelleri, A. V. Joshi, and N. C. 
Patel. 2014. “Impact of a Pregabalin Step Therapy Policy among 
Medicare Advantage Beneficiaries.” Pain Practice, vol. 14 (5): 419-426. 
Tang, Y., W. F. Gellad, A. Men, and J. M. Donohue. “Impact of Medicare 
Part D Plan Features on Use of Generic Drugs.” Medical Care, vol. 52, 
no. 6 (2014): 541-548. 
Thatcher, E. E., E. M. Vanwert, and S. R. Erickson. “Potential Impact of 
Pharmacist Interventions to Reduce Cost for Medicare Part D 
Beneficiaries.” Journal of Pharmacy Practice, vol. 26, no. 3 (2013): 248-
252. 
Touchette, D. R., A. L. Masica, R. J. Dolor, G. T. Schumock, Y. K. Choi, 
Y. Kim, and S. R. Smith. “Safety-Focused Medication Therapy 
Management: A Randomized Controlled Trial.” Journal of the American 
Pharmacists Association, vol. 52, no. 5 (2012): 603-612. 
Ward, M. A., and Y. Xu. “Pharmacist-Provided Telephonic Medication 
Therapy Management in an MAPD Plan.” The American Journal of 
Managed Care, vol. 17, no. 10 (2011): e399-e409. 
Welch, E. K., T. Delate, E. A. Chester, and T. Stubbings. “Assessment of 
the Impact of Medication Therapy Management Delivered to Home-Based 
Medicare Beneficiaries.” The Annals of Pharmacotherapy, vol. 43, no. 4 
(2009): 603-610. 
West, J. C., J. E. Wilk, I. L. Muszynski, D. S. Rae, M. Rubio-Stipec, C. L. 
Alter, W. E. Narrow, and D. A. Regier. “Medication Access and Continuity: 
The Experiences of Dual-Eligible Psychiatric Patients during the First 4 
Months of the Medicare Prescription Drug Benefit.” The American Journal 
of Psychiatry, vol. 164, no. 5 (2007): 789-796. 
West, J. C., J. E. Wilk, D. S. Rae, I. L. Muszynski, M. Rubio-Stipec, C. L. 
Alter, K. E. Sanders, S. Crystal, and D. A. Regier. “First-Year Medicare 
Part D Prescription Drug Benefits: Medication Access and Continuity 
among Dual Eligible Psychiatric Patients.” The Journal of Clinical 
Psychiatry, vol. 71, no. 4 (2010): 400-410. 
===PAGE 83===
 
Appendix VII: Bibliography of Peer Reviewed 
Studies Used in GAO’s Literature Review 
 
 
 
 
Page 77 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
Winston, S., and Y.S. Lin. “Impact on Drug Cost and Use of Medicare 
Part D of Medication Therapy Management Services Delivered in 2007.” 
Journal of the American Pharmacists Association, vol. 49, no. 6 (2009): 
813-820. 
Woelfel, J. A., S. M. Carr-Lopez, M. D. Santos, A. Bui, R. A. Patel, M. P. 
Walberg, and S. M. Galal. “Assessing Medicare Beneficiaries’ 
Willingness-to-Pay for Medication Therapy Management Services.” The 
Consultant Pharmacist, vol. 29, no. 2 (2014): 104-109. 
Zillich, A. J., M. E. Snyder, C. K. Frail, J. L. Lewis, D. Deshotels, P. 
Dunham, H. A. Jaynes, and J. M. Sutherland. “A Randomized, Controlled 
Pragmatic Trial of Telephonic Medication Therapy Management to 
Reduce Hospitalization in Home Health Patients.” Health Services 
Research, vol. 49, no. 5 (2014): 1537-1554. 
===PAGE 84===
 
Appendix VIII: GAO Contact and Staff 
Acknowledgments 
 
 
 
 
Page 78 GAO-19-498  Medicare Part D 
 
John E. Dicken, (202) 512-7114 or dickenj@gao.gov 
 
In addition to the contact named above, Robert Copeland, Assistant 
Director; William A. Crafton, Analyst-in-Charge; Britt Carlson, Kaitlin 
Dunn, Andrew Emmons, Michael Rose, and Dan Ries made key 
contributions to this report. Also contributing were George Bogart, Yesook 
Merrill, Laurie Pachter, and Vikki Porter. 
 
Appendix VIII: GAO Contact and Staff 
Acknowledgments 
GAO Contact  
Staff 
Acknowledgements 
(102043) 
===PAGE 85===
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Government Accountability Office, the audit, evaluation, and investigative 
arm of Congress, exists to support Congress in meeting its constitutional 
responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the 
federal government for the American people. GAO examines the use of public 
funds; evaluates federal programs and policies; and provides analyses, 
recommendations, and other assistance to help Congress make informed 
oversight, policy, and funding decisions. GAO’s commitment to good government 
is reflected in its core values of accountability, integrity, and reliability. 
The fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of GAO documents at no cost is 
through GAO’s website (https://www.gao.gov). Each weekday afternoon, GAO 
posts on its website newly released reports, testimony, and correspondence. To 
have GAO e-mail you a list of newly posted products, go to https://www.gao.gov 
and select “E-mail Updates.” 
The price of each GAO publication reflects GAO’s actual cost of production and 
distribution and depends on the number of pages in the publication and whether 
the publication is printed in color or black and white. Pricing and ordering 
information is posted on GAO’s website, https://www.gao.gov/ordering.htm.  
Place orders by calling (202) 512-6000, toll free (866) 801-7077, or  
TDD (202) 512-2537. 
Orders may be paid for using American Express, Discover Card, MasterCard, 
Visa, check, or money order. Call for additional information. 
Connect with GAO on Facebook, Flickr, Twitter, and YouTube. 
Subscribe to our RSS Feeds or E-mail Updates. Listen to our Podcasts. 
Visit GAO on the web at https://www.gao.gov. 
Contact FraudNet: 
Website: https://www.gao.gov/fraudnet/fraudnet.htm 
Automated answering system: (800) 424-5454 or (202) 512-7700 
Orice Williams Brown, Managing Director, WilliamsO@gao.gov, (202) 512-4400, 
U.S. Government Accountability Office, 441 G Street NW, Room 7125, 
Washington, DC 20548 
Chuck Young, Managing Director, youngc1@gao.gov, (202) 512-4800 
U.S. Government Accountability Office, 441 G Street NW, Room 7149  
Washington, DC 20548 
James-Christian Blockwood, Managing Director, spel@gao.gov, (202) 512-4707 
U.S. Government Accountability Office, 441 G Street NW, Room 7814, 
Washington, DC 20548 
GAO’s Mission 
Obtaining Copies of 
GAO Reports and 
Testimony 
Order by Phone 
Connect with GAO 
To Report Fraud, 
Waste, and Abuse in 
Federal Programs 
Congressional 
Relations 
Public Affairs 
Strategic Planning and 
External Liaison 
Please Print on Recycled Paper.