
===PAGE 1===
Department of Health and Human Services 
OFFICE OF 
INSPECTOR GENERAL 
 
 
THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA HAS 
TAKEN SIGNIFICANT STEPS TO ENSURE 
ACCOUNTABILITY OVER AMOUNTS 
MANAGED CARE ORGANIZATIONS PAID 
TO PHARMACY BENEFIT MANAGERS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amy J. Frontz 
Deputy Inspector General 
for Audit Services 
 
March 2023 
A-03-20-00200
Inquiries about this report may be addressed to the Office of Public Affairs at 
Public.Affairs@oig.hhs.gov. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
===PAGE 2===
 
Office of Inspector General 
https://oig.hhs.gov 
 
 
 
The mission of the Office of Inspector General (OIG), as mandated by Public Law 95-452, as amended, is 
to protect the integrity of the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) programs, as well as the 
health and welfare of beneficiaries served by those programs.  This statutory mission is carried out 
through a nationwide network of audits, investigations, and inspections conducted by the following 
operating components: 
 
Office of Audit Services 
 
The Office of Audit Services (OAS) provides auditing services for HHS, either by conducting audits with 
its own audit resources or by overseeing audit work done by others.  Audits examine the performance of 
HHS programs and/or its grantees and contractors in carrying out their respective responsibilities and are 
intended to provide independent assessments of HHS programs and operations.  These audits help reduce 
waste, abuse, and mismanagement and promote economy and efficiency throughout HHS.  
        
Office of Evaluation and Inspections 
 
The Office of Evaluation and Inspections (OEI) conducts national evaluations to provide HHS, Congress, 
and the public with timely, useful, and reliable information on significant issues.  These evaluations focus 
on preventing fraud, waste, or abuse and promoting economy, efficiency, and effectiveness of 
departmental programs.  To promote impact, OEI reports also present practical recommendations for 
improving program operations. 
 
Office of Investigations 
 
The Office of Investigations (OI) conducts criminal, civil, and administrative investigations of fraud and 
misconduct related to HHS programs, operations, and beneficiaries.  With investigators working in all 50 
States and the District of Columbia, OI utilizes its resources by actively coordinating with the Department 
of Justice and other Federal, State, and local law enforcement authorities.  The investigative efforts of OI 
often lead to criminal convictions, administrative sanctions, and/or civil monetary penalties. 
 
Office of Counsel to the Inspector General 
 
The Office of Counsel to the Inspector General (OCIG) provides general legal services to OIG, rendering 
advice and opinions on HHS programs and operations and providing all legal support for OIG’s internal 
operations.  OCIG represents OIG in all civil and administrative fraud and abuse cases involving HHS 
programs, including False Claims Act, program exclusion, and civil monetary penalty cases.  In 
connection with these cases, OCIG also negotiates and monitors corporate integrity agreements.  OCIG 
renders advisory opinions, issues compliance program guidance, publishes fraud alerts, and provides 
other guidance to the health care industry concerning the anti-kickback statute and other OIG enforcement 
authorities. 
 
===PAGE 3===
 
Notices 
 
 
 
 
THIS REPORT IS AVAILABLE TO THE PUBLIC 
at https://oig.hhs.gov 
 
Section 8M of the Inspector General Act, 5 U.S.C. App., requires 
that OIG post its publicly available reports on the OIG website.  
 
OFFICE OF AUDIT SERVICES FINDINGS AND OPINIONS 
 
The designation of financial or management practices as 
questionable, a recommendation for the disallowance of costs 
incurred or claimed, and any other conclusions and 
recommendations in this report represent the findings and 
opinions of OAS.  Authorized officials of the HHS operating 
divisions will make final determination on these matters. 
 
===PAGE 4===
 
  
   
  
    
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
   
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
   
  
  
  
  
   
  
 
   
  
 
 
  
   
      
 
  
  
 
 
     
  
    
   
   
      
   
 
  
 
 
 
  
     
      
  
 
    
 
  
      
  
  
 
      
    
    
     
    
      
    
   
  
 
Report in Brief 
Date: March 2023 
Report No. A-03-20-00200 
Why OIG Did This Audit 
Spread pricing occurs when a 
managed care organization (MCO) 
contracts with a pharmacy benefit 
manager (PBM) to manage its 
prescription drug benefits, and the 
PBM keeps a portion of the amount 
the MCO paid to it for prescription 
drugs instead of passing the full 
payment on to the pharmacy. 
Several States have conducted audits 
of PBM spread pricing practices due 
to concerns about the transparency 
and appropriateness of spread 
pricing in the Medicaid program. 
Other States, including New York, 
Texas, and Virginia, have enacted or 
drafted legislation to increase 
transparency and change the 
contracting process with PBMs. 
Our objective was to determine 
whether the District of Columbia 
provided oversight of its MCOs to 
ensure adequate accountability over 
amounts paid to PBMs for 
prescription benefits. 
How OIG Did This Audit 
We reviewed the contracts between 
the District and its five MCOs and the 
seven contracts between those MCOs 
and PBMs from October 1, 2016, 
through September 30, 2019 (audit 
period).  We also reviewed the five 
MCOs’ claims for prescription drugs 
dispensed during the audit period 
and obtained the amounts the PBMs 
reimbursed pharmacies for the 
prescription drugs dispensed during 
the audit period.  
The District of Columbia Has Taken Significant Steps 
To Ensure Accountability Over Amounts Managed 
Care Organizations Paid to Pharmacy Benefit 
Managers 
What OIG Found 
The District provided some oversight of its MCOs with the intent of ensuring 
adequate accountability over amounts paid for prescription benefits to its 
PBMs.  This oversight consisted of guidance requiring MCOs to report spread 
pricing.  However, the amounts reported were aggregated with other amounts 
and as a result did not provide transparency over the amount of the funds that 
was attributable to spread pricing.  We found that PBMs kept $23.3 million in 
spread pricing during our audit period.  Spread pricing may increase the cost 
of Medicaid prescriptions for both the MCO and the Medicaid program and, if 
not correctly accounted for, inflate the cost of the drugs.  Limiting spread 
pricing may decrease Federal and State spending through lower payments to 
MCOs. 
What OIG Recommends and District Comments 
We recommend that the District develop policies and procedures for 
validating MCO, PBM, and pharmacy transactions on a periodic basis to ensure 
transparency of costs associated with the prescription drug program. 
In written comments on our draft report, the District concurred with our 
recommendation and asked for clarification and guidance regarding the 
amounts or percentages that are deemed appropriate for PBMs to retain 
under the practice of spread pricing.  The District also asked for clarification 
regarding whether it should require its contracted MCOs to make a separate 
payment to its PBMs for administrative costs and fees. 
We appreciate the District’s desire to improve its PBM oversight, an important 
topic receiving much congressional interest. After receiving its comments, w e 
met with the District to discuss some observations that we noted during the 
audit and encouraged the District to contact the Centers for Medicare & 
Medicaid Services for clarification and guidance and work with other State 
agencies and its counsel to determine best practices. In addition, while we did 
not specifically recommend that the District disaggregate information in the 
medical loss ratio report, we look forward to the steps the District takes to 
ensure transparency of costs associated with the prescription drug program. 
The full report can be found at https://oig.hhs.gov/oas/reports/region3/32000200.asp. 
===PAGE 5===
  
  
 
   
     
   
   
    
    
    
  
    
      
      
  
        
   
     
 
    
     
 
 
  
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
INTRODUCTION............................................................................................................................... 1 
The State Agency Has Taken Steps To Increase Accountability Over 
APPENDICES 
Why We Did This Audit ....................................................................................................... 1 
Objective ............................................................................................................................. 1 
Background ......................................................................................................................... 1 
Medicaid Program................................................................................................... 1 
Department of Health Care Finance....................................................................... 2 
How We Conducted This Audit........................................................................................... 2 
FINDING........................................................................................................................................... 2 
Federal Requirements......................................................................................................... 3 
The State Agency’s Oversight Did Not Provide Transparency Over Spread Pricing ........... 5 
Spread Pricing Amounts Were Aggregated With Other Amounts ......................... 5 
Spread Pricing but Could Take Additional Steps To Improve Oversight.............. 6 
RECOMMENDATION ....................................................................................................................... 7 
STATE AGENCY COMMENTS AND OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL RESPONSE ............................ 7 
A: Audit Scope and Methodology ....................................................................................... 8 
B: State Agency Comments............................................................................................... 10 
The District of Columbia Has Taken Significant Steps To Ensure Accountability Over Amounts Managed Care 
Organizations Paid to Pharmacy Benefit Managers (A-03-20-00200) 
===PAGE 6===
  
  
 
   
    
     
    
     
    
   
     
     
 
     
      
  
 
   
    
     
      
    
    
    
      
    
     
    
       
      
     
 
   
      
 
   
INTRODUCTION 
WHY WE DID THIS AUDIT 
Spread pricing occurs when a managed care organization (MCO) contracts with a pharmacy 
benefit manager (PBM) to manage its prescription drug benefits, and the PBM keeps a portion 
of the amount the MCO paid to it for the prescription drugs instead of passing the full payment 
on to the pharmacy. Several States, including Ohio, Kentucky, Maryland, and Pennsylvania, 
have conducted audits of PBM spread pricing practices due to concerns about the transparency 
and appropriateness of spread pricing in the Medicaid program.  Other States, including New 
York, Texas, and Virginia, have enacted or drafted legislation to increase transparency and 
change the contracting process with PBMs. 
OBJECTIVE 
Our objective was to determine whether the District of Columbia’s (the District’s) Department 
of Health Care Finance (State agency) provided oversight of its MCOs to ensure adequate 
accountability over amounts paid to PBMs for prescription benefits. 
BACKGROUND 
Medicaid Program 
The Medicaid program provides medical assistance to low-income individuals and individuals 
with disabilities. The Federal and State governments jointly fund and administer the Medicaid 
program. At the Federal level, the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) administers 
the Medicaid program. Although the State has considerable flexibility in designing and 
operating its Medicaid program, it must comply with applicable Federal requirements. 
MCOs contract with State Medicaid agencies to ensure that beneficiaries receive covered 
Medicaid services.  Under these contracts, MCOs arrange for a network of providers to deliver 
to enrolled beneficiaries certain benefits and services, including prescription drugs, specified by 
the State.  In exchange, the State Medicaid agency generally pays MCOs a capitation payment, 
which is a fixed amount per member per month, for each enrolled beneficiary.  The capitation 
payment represents a payment amount that is adequate to allow the MCO to efficiently deliver 
covered services to beneficiaries in a manner compliant with contractual requirements.
1 
MCOs may contract with PBMs to manage or administer drug benefits on the MCO’s behalf. 
PBMs offer a variety of services such as establishing retail, mail-order, and specialty pharmacy 
networks; negotiating pharmacy reimbursement rates; adjudicating pharmacy claims; and 
negotiating supplemental rebates with pharmaceutical manufacturers. 
1 42 CFR § 438.3(c). 
The District of Columbia Has Taken Significant Steps To Ensure Accountability Over Amounts Managed Care 
Organizations Paid to Pharmacy Benefit Managers (A-03-20-00200) 1 
===PAGE 7===
  
  
      
    
   
  
     
   
   
     
      
     
  
  
       
      
      
  
   
          
          
      
    
       
       
        
        
   
        
   
   
     
     
 
       
    
 
  
   
The practice of spread pricing, which occurs when a PBM keeps a portion of the amount the 
MCO paid to it for prescription drugs instead of passing the full payment on to the pharmacy, is 
currently permissible according to Federal law. H owever, because contracts between PBMs 
and pharmacies are proprietary, State Medicaid agencies often cannot verify the amount of 
spread pricing. If spread pricing is not appropriately monitored and accounted for, MCOs may 
not be aware of the spread amount included in pharmacy costs and may negotiate separate 
administrative payments to PBMs without knowing how much PBM profit is already built into 
the pharmacy costs as spread pricing. The State Medicaid agency may use these inflated 
pharmacy costs in setting capitation rates.  If the State Medicaid agency increases its capitated 
payments to MCOs based on a rate setting influenced by inflated pharmacy costs, it increases 
the cost of the Medicaid program. 
Department of Health Care Finance 
The State agency’s mission is to improve health outcomes by providing access to 
comprehensive, cost-effective, quality health care services for District residents. For State fiscal 
years (FYs) 2017 through 2019, the State agency’s contracted MCOs paid PBMs over $364.4 
million for pharmacy claims. 
HOW WE CONDUCTED THIS AUDIT 
We reviewed the contracts between the State agency and its five MCOs and the seven 
contracts between those MCOs and PBMs from October 1, 2016, through September 30, 2019 
(audit period). Specifically, we reviewed the contracts the State agency had with the five MCOs 
to determine the payment terms and guidance for spread pricing contained in the contracts.2 
We also reviewed the five MCOs’ claims for prescription drugs dispensed during our audit 
period and obtained the amounts the PBMs reimbursed pharmacies for the prescription drugs 
dispensed during our audit period. For the claims, we calculated the difference between the 
amounts the MCOs paid to the PBMs and the amounts the PBMs paid to the pharmacies. 
We conducted this performance audit in accordance with generally accepted government 
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain 
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions 
based on our audit objectives.  We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable 
basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. 
The Appendix contains the details of our audit scope and methodology. 
FINDING 
The District provided some oversight of its MCOs with the intent of ensuring adequate 
accountability over amounts paid for prescription benefits to its PBMs. This oversight consisted 
2 During our audit period, the contracts between the State agency and its MCOs did not contain language 
prohibiting spread pricing. 
The District of Columbia Has Taken Significant Steps To Ensure Accountability Over Amounts Managed Care 
Organizations Paid to Pharmacy Benefit Managers (A-03-20-00200) 2 
===PAGE 8===
  
  
       
     
        
      
  
      
  
 
     
    
    
       
  
    
  
  
     
    
    
    
    
     
     
     
    
     
 
 
   
   
     
     
      
  
    
     
 
  
 
of guidance requiring MCOs to report spread pricing. However, the amounts reported were 
aggregated with other amounts and as a result did not provide transparency over the amount 
of the funds that was attributable to spread pricing. We found that PBMs kept $23.3 million in 
spread pricing during our audit period. Spread pricing may increase the cost of Medicaid 
prescriptions for both the MCO and the Medicaid program and, if not correctly accounted for, 
inflate the cost of the drugs. Limiting spread pricing may decrease Federal and State spending 
through lower payments to MCOs. 
FEDERAL REQUIREMENTS 
Federal requirements at 42 CFR section 438.230 state that States must ensure, through their 
contracts, that each MCO is ultimately responsible for adhering to and complying with all terms 
and conditions of its contract with the State, notwithstanding any relationship that the MCO 
may have with any subcontractor. Similarly, 42 CFR section 438.230 requires subcontractors to 
comply with the standards that govern the managed care plan’s performance as stated in the 
managed care plan’s contract.
3 
For Medicaid managed care contracts that started on or after July 1, 2017, States are to include 
requirements for managed care plans to calculate and report a medical loss ratio (MLR), 
including related underlying data as described in 42 CFR section 438.8. In addition, under 42 
CFR section 438.8(k)(3), managed care plans must require any third-party vendor providing 
claims adjudication activities to provide all underlying data associated with MLR reporting to 
the managed care plan to calculate and validate the accuracy of MLR reporting. 
As provided by 42 CFR sections 438.8(d) through (f), the MLR experienced for each managed 
care plan in an MLR reporting year is expressed as a ratio in which the numerator is the sum of 
the managed care plan’s incurred claims, expenditures for activities that improve health care 
quality, and fraud prevention activities. The denominator is the adjusted premium revenue, 
which is the managed care plan’s premium revenue minus Federal, State, and local taxes and 
licensing and regulatory fees. The premium revenue is aggregated for all Medicaid eligibility 
groups covered under the contract with the State unless the State requires separate reporting 
and a separate MLR calculation for specific populations. 
Under 42 CFR section 438.8(e)(2)(v)(A), the incurred claims used in the numerator must exclude 
non-claims costs, which include: (1) amounts paid to third-party vendors for secondary network 
savings; (2) amounts paid to third-party vendors for network development, administrative fees, 
claims processing, and utilization management; (3) amounts, including those amounts paid to a 
provider, that are paid for professional or administrative services that do not represent 
compensation or reimbursement for State Plan services or services meeting the definition of in-
lieu-of services in 42 CFR section 438.3(e) and provided to an enrollee; and (4) fines and 
penalties assessed by regulatory authorities.  As stated in 42 CFR section 438.8(e)(2)(ii)(B), 
3 Managed care plans provide for the delivery of Medicaid health benefits and additional services through 
contracted arrangements between State Medicaid agencies and MCOs. 
The District of Columbia Has Taken Significant Steps To Ensure Accountability Over Amounts Managed Care 
Organizations Paid to Pharmacy Benefit Managers (A-03-20-00200) 3 
===PAGE 9===
  
  
 
 
  
   
   
       
    
 
    
     
      
    
  
   
   
        
    
   
  
    
    
    
  
   
   
   
  
      
         
   
   
 
   
  
  
  
   
 
  
prescription drug rebates received and accrued must also be deducted from the incurred 
claims. 
Federal regulations at 42 CFR section 438.74(a) specify that the State must submit to CMS on an 
annual basis a summary description of the report or reports received from its contracted MCOs 
according to section 438.8(k).  The summary description must include, at a minimum, the 
amount of the numerator, the amount of the denominator, the MLR percentage achieved, the 
number of member months, and any remittances owed by each MCO for that MLR reporting 
year. 
In a May 15, 2019, Informational Bulletin, CMS highlighted and clarified that its interpretation 
of 42 CFR section 438.8(e)(2)(ii)(B) requires that prescription drug rebates received and accrued 
must be deducted from incurred claims.
4 CMS interprets this regulation to require that any 
time a managed care plan receives something of value for the provision of a Medicaid covered 
outpatient drug (e.g., manufacturer rebates, incentive payments, direct or indirect 
remuneration, goods in kind), the value must be deducted from the amount of incurred claims 
used for calculating and reporting the MLR.  Spread pricing would be considered something of 
value and should be deducted from the number of incurred claims in the MLR.
5 In the press 
release accompanying the Informational Bulletin, CMS added: 
In today’s guidance CMS is making clear that, for purposes of the MLR 
regulation, “prescription drug rebates” means any price concession or discount 
received by the managed care plan or by its PBM, regardless of who pays the 
rebate or discount. Some possible examples include payments from 
pharmaceutical manufacturers, wholesalers, and retail pharmacies. Therefore, 
the amount retained by a PBM under spread pricing would have to be excluded 
from the amount of claims costs used for calculating the managed care plan’s 
MLR.  The policy underpinning this guidance is that spread pricing should not be 
used to artificially inflate a Medicaid or [Children’s Health Insurance Program] 
managed care plan’s MLR. 
Further, according to the Informational Bulletin, the requirement to deduct spread pricing from 
incurred claims applies regardless of whether value is received by the managed care plan or by 
a subcontractor administering the covered outpatient drug benefit on behalf of the managed 
care plan. 
4 CMS, “CMCS Informational Bulletin: Medical Loss Ratio (MLR) Requirements Related to Third -Party Vendors.” 
Available at https://www.medicaid.gov/federal-policy-guidance/downloads/cib051519.pdf.  Accessed on 
August 18, 2022. 
5 CMS Press Release, “CMS Issues New Guidance Addressing Spread Pricing in Medicaid, Ensures Pharmacy Benefit 
Managers are not Up-Charging Taxpayers.” Available at https://www.cms.gov/newsroom/press-releases/cms-
issues-new-guidance-addressing-spread-pricing-medicaid-ensures-pharmacy-benefit-managers-are-not.  Accessed 
on August 18, 2022. 
The District of Columbia Has Taken Significant Steps To Ensure Accountability Over Amounts Managed Care 
Organizations Paid to Pharmacy Benefit Managers (A-03-20-00200) 4 
===PAGE 10===
  
  
     
      
  
        
      
    
    
     
   
    
   
    
    
     
    
     
     
      
   
     
      
      
        
        
       
 
  
 
  
 
THE STATE AGENCY’S OVERSIGHT DID NOT PROVIDE TRANSPARENCY OVER SPREAD PRICING 
Spread Pricing Amounts Were Aggregated With Other Amounts 
During our audit period, the State agency provided some oversight, through its instructions and 
guidance for MCOs to report spread pricing, with the intent of ensuring adequate accountability 
over amounts paid for prescription benefits. Specifically, during our audit period, the State 
agency instructed its MCOs to submit MLR reports and provided its MCOs with explicit 
instructions related to reporting spread pricing. However, the State agency only instructed 
MCOs to report spread pricing in aggregate with other amounts, and thus the spread pricing 
amounts were not transparent. 
The State agency’s “Instructions for MLR Report” specified that MCOs were to report pharmacy 
expenditures and the gross total of rebates, excluding any spread pricing.  In addition, the 
guidance instructed MCOs to total the PBM spread pricing amount and the amounts paid to 
third party vendors for network development, administrative fees, claims processing, and 
utilization management and report the combined total of these amounts as one line item on 
each MCO’s MLR Report.  Upon receipt of the MLR reports, the State agency did not perform 
validation steps such as reviewing transactions between the MCO and PBM and the PBM and 
pharmacy because it had no policies or procedures to require such steps.  
Because the spread pricing and third-party payment amounts were aggregated, the State 
agency could not validate the amount of spread pricing in the MLR reports, and the spread 
pricing amounts were not transparent to the State agency. 
During our audit period, the MCOs paid PBMs over $364.4 million for prescription claims, and 
the PBMs paid pharmacies over $341.1 million for those prescription claims.  The remaining 
$23.3 million is the spread pricing that was kept by the PBMs. (See the table on the following 
page.)  This $23.3 million is in addition to the other fees the MCOs paid the PBMs. During our 
audit period, the PBMs received a total of $12.4 million from these other fees.
6 
6 PBMs provide a variety of services such as establishing retail, mail-order, and specialty pharmacy networks; 
negotiating pharmacy reimbursement rates; adjudicating pharmacy claims; and negotiating supplemental rebates 
with pharmaceutical manufacturers.  The specific services the PBM provided varied depending on the MCO -PBM 
contract. 
The District of Columbia Has Taken Significant Steps To Ensure Accountability Over Amounts Managed Care 
Organizations Paid to Pharmacy Benefit Managers (A-03-20-00200) 5 
===PAGE 11===
  
  
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
            
        
        
  
      
 
      
        
      
   
        
  
   
   
   
     
   
  
   
         
   
    
     
     
    
     
      
   
 
      
     
      
   
 
Table: Amounts MCOs Paid to PBMs and Amounts PBMs Paid to Pharmacies 
MCO PBM 
Amount 
MCO Paid to 
PBM 
Amount PBM 
Paid to 
Pharmacies 
Spread 
Amount 
Kept by PBM 
Other Fees 
Paid to PBM 
MCO A PBM 1 $6,971,821 $5,626,543 $1,345,278 $142,560 PBM 2 24,795,253 18,585,338 6,209,915 
MCO B PBM 3 199,347,433 199,347,433 0 10,017,531 
MCO C PBM 4 50,773,859 41,253,331 9,520,528 0 
MCO D 
PBM 5 5,885,651 5,870,732 14,920* 
2,121,590 PBM 6 30,547,136 29,751,791 795,345 
MCO E PBM 4 46,141,875 40,724,475 5,417,400 145,782 
Totals $364,463,028 $341,159,643 $23,303,386 $12,427,463 
*Amounts do not calculate exactly due to rounding. 
The State agency could not account for this $23.3 million in spread pricing kept by PBMs during 
our audit period.  Although spread pricing is currently federally permissible, the State agency 
was unaware of the exact amount of spread pricing. 
Spread pricing may increase the cost of Medicaid prescriptions to both MCOs and the Medicaid 
program.  Spread pricing occurs when the PBM keeps a portion of the amount the MCO paid for 
prescription drugs instead of passing the full payment on to pharmacies. If spread pricing is not 
appropriately monitored and accounted for, MCOs may not be aware of the spread amount 
included in the pharmacy costs and may negotiate separate administrative payments to PBMs 
without knowing how much PBM profit is already built into the pharmacy costs as spread 
pricing.  The State agency may use these inflated pharmacy costs in setting capitation rates. If 
the State agency increases its capitated payments to MCOs based on a rate setting influenced 
by spread pricing, it thereby increases the cost of the Medicaid program. 
The State Agency Has Taken Steps To Increase Accountability Over Spread Pricing but Could 
Take Additional Steps To Improve Oversight 
During our audit but after our audit period, the State agency took steps to improve its oversight 
of MCOs and accountability over PBM spread pricing. In October 2020, the State agency 
modified its contracts with MCOs to include specific language to, among other things, eliminate 
spread pricing in contracts between MCOs and PBMs.  It also added a requirement for MCOs to 
provide the State agency with information on contract terms with PBMs, including estimates of 
PBM profits and payment streams. However, the State agency currently does not confirm the 
individual amounts reported on the MLR report. Formally establishing policies and procedures 
to validate the amounts (MCO, PBM, and pharmacy transactions) on the MLR report on a 
periodic basis will help to ensure transparency of costs associated with the prescription drug 
program. 
The District of Columbia Has Taken Significant Steps To Ensure Accountability Over Amounts Managed Care 
Organizations Paid to Pharmacy Benefit Managers (A-03-20-00200) 6 
===PAGE 12===
  
  
 
    
       
   
    
     
  
     
  
     
    
      
     
     
     
      
  
   
   
  
RECOMMENDATION 
We recommend that the District of Columbia Department of Health Care Finance develop 
policies and procedures for validating MCO, PBM, and pharmacy transactions on a periodic 
basis to ensure transparency of costs associated with the prescription drug program. 
STATE AGENCY COMMENTS AND OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL RESPONSE 
In written comments on our draft report, the State agency concurred with our recommendation 
and asked for clarification and guidance regarding the amounts or percentages that are 
deemed appropriate for PBMs to retain under the practice of spread pricing.  The State agency 
also asked for clarification regarding whether it should require its contracted MCOs to make a 
separate payment to its PBMs for administrative costs and fees. 
We appreciate the State agency’s desire to improve its PBM oversight, an important topic 
receiving much congressional interest. After receiving its comments, we met with the State 
agency to discuss some observations that we noted during the audit and encouraged the State 
agency to contact CMS for clarification and guidance and work with other State agencies and its 
counsel to determine best practices. 
In addition, while we did not specifically recommend that the State agency disaggregate 
information in the MLR report, we look forward to the steps the State agency takes to ensure 
transparency of costs associated with the prescription drug program. 
The State agency’s comments are included in their entirety as Appendix B. 
The District of Columbia Has Taken Significant Steps To Ensure Accountability Over Amounts Managed Care 
Organizations Paid to Pharmacy Benefit Managers (A-03-20-00200) 7 
===PAGE 13===
  
  
  
 
      
          
   
      
       
      
     
      
      
      
 
   
    
     
      
    
   
     
  
    
       
       
 
       
   
    
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX A: AUDIT SCOPE AND METHODOLOGY 
SCOPE 
Our audit covered 6,198,833 prescription drug claims totaling $341,159,643 reimbursed to 
pharmacies during State FYs 2017 through 2019.  MCOs paid $364,463,028 to the PBMs for 
these claims. 
We did not review the State agency’s overall internal control structure. We limited our review 
of internal controls to those applicable to our objective. Specifically, we reviewed the State 
agency’s internal controls related to contracting with MCOs. To assess the State agency’s 
control activities, we interviewed contracting officials and reviewed copies of the State agency’s 
policies and procedures to obtain an understanding of the State agency’s contracting policies 
and procedures as they involve spread pricing. 
We performed our audit work from November 2019 through September 2022. 
METHODOLOGY 
To accomplish the objective, we: 
• reviewed applicable Federal laws, regulations, and other requirements; 
• met with CMS program officials to discuss the Federal requirements regarding spread 
pricing that the State agency and MCOs must follow; 
• interviewed State agency officials to obtain an understanding of the State agency’s 
policies, procedures, and guidance for MCOs; 
• interviewed State agency officials to obtain an understanding of the State agency’s 
processes for contracting with MCOs; 
• obtained and reviewed contracts between the State agency and the MCOs; 
• obtained the MCOs’ quarterly and annual MLR reports submitted to the State agency; 
• obtained Medicaid claims for prescription drugs from the PBMs for State FYs 2017 
through 2019; 
• calculated the difference between what the MCOs paid to PBMs and what the PBMs 
paid to pharmacies; 
• obtained and reviewed contracts between MCOs and their PBMs; and 
• met with State agency officials to discuss the results of our audit. 
The District of Columbia Has Taken Significant Steps To Ensure Accountability Over Amounts Managed Care 
Organizations Paid to Pharmacy Benefit Managers (A-03-20-00200) 8 
===PAGE 14===
  
  
   
        
   
   
     
  
We conducted this performance audit in accordance with generally accepted government 
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain 
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions 
based on our audit objectives.  We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable 
basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. 
The District of Columbia Has Taken Significant Steps To Ensure Accountability Over Amounts Managed Care 
Organizations Paid to Pharmacy Benefit Managers (A-03-20-00200) 9 
===PAGE 15===
  
  
   
 
  
GOVERNMENT OF lBEDISTRICT OF COLUMBIA 
Department of Health Care Finance 
.., ... * 
Offict of tuStoio<DtpuyDD-t<tor, u DHCF
Medicaid Director
January 19, 2023 
Nicole Freda 
Regional Inspector General for Audit Services
Office Of Audit Services,Region m 
801 MarketStreet, Suite 8500 
Philadelphia, PA 19107-3134 
Sent by electrooic mail to Nicole.Freda@oig.hhs.gov 
Re: Report Number A-03-20-00200
Dear Ms. Freda: 
The D.C. Department of Health Care Finance (DHCF) is in receipt of the HHS OIG Draft 
Report The District of Columbia Has Taken Significant Steps to Ensure Accountabilily 
Over Amounts lo Managed Care Organizations Paid lo Pharmacy Benefit Managers. In 
this lefter, please find DHCF's written comments to the recommendations contained in 
this Draft Report,including a statement of concurrenceor n onconcurrence with the 
recommendation. 
In the DraftReport, the OIG recommendedthat DHCF develop policies and procedures 
for validating MOO, PBM, and pharmacytransactions on a periodic basis to ensure 
transparency of costs associated with the prescription drug program. The OIG also 
recommends that DHCF disaggregate the report in order to obtain more accurate spread­
pricing information.DHCF does not object to this recommendationand concurs to the 
extent that additional clarification is needed. Specifically, in order to implement 
meaningful policies and procedures, DHCF requests clarification or guidance regarding 
amounts or percentages that are deemed appropriate for PBMs to retain under the 
otherwisepermissiblepractice of spread-pricing. This guidance will provide assistance to 
DHCF in both developing policies and procedures and enforcing accountability regarding 
spread-pricing. Additionally, DHCF requests clarification regarding whetherit should 
require its contracted MCOs to make a separate payment to its PBMs for administrative 
costs a:nd fees. 
441 41thStreet NW, Suite 900 South, Washington, D.C. 20001 (202) 442-5988 Fax. (202) 4424 790 
APPENDIX B: STATE AGENCY COMMENTS 
The District of Columbia Has Taken Significant Steps To Ensure Accountability Over Amounts Managed Care 
Organizations Paid to Pharmacy Benefit Managers (A-03-20-00200) 10 
===PAGE 16===
  
  
 
 
Page2 of2 
Report Number A-03-20-00200 
If you haveany questions or require any further infonnation from DHCF, please feel free 
to contact Lisa Truitt, Director of the DHCF Heal1h Care Delivery Management 
Administration at lisa.truitt@dc.gov. 
Sincerely, 
SignatureSignature(Pct. 
Melisa Byrd 
Senior Deputy Director and Medicaid Director 
D.C. Department of Health CareFmance 
441 41h Street NW, Suite 900 Soudl, Washington. D.C. 20001 (202) 442-5988 Fax. (202) 4424
The District of Columbia Has Taken Significant Steps To Ensure Accountability Over Amounts Managed Care 
Organizations Paid to Pharmacy Benefit Managers (A-03-20-00200) 11 