
===PAGE 1===
 
Commonwealth of Kentucky 
Cabinet for Health and Family Services  
 
 
  
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE 
 
Contact: Doug Hogan 
502-564-7042, ext. 3467 
Beth Fisher 
502-564-6786, ext. 3101 
 
Kentucky Medicaid Releases Report on Pharmacy 
Benefit Program 
  
FRANKFORT, Ky. (Feb. 19, 2019) – The Cabinet for Health and Family Services 
Department for Medicaid Services (DMS) and Office of Health Data and Analytics 
released a new report today on the state’s pharmacy benefit program. 
“MEDICAID PHARMACY PRICING: Opening the Black Box”  looks at the impact and 
role of Pharmacy Benefit Managers (PBMs), which serve as intermediaries between 
Medicaid Managed Care Organizations (MCOs) and pharmacies. The report provides 
recommendations to help create transparency, control the pricing of medications for 
Medicaid beneficiaries, and improve the care provided by pharmacies within the 
Commonwealth. 
“This report represents the first step in introducing transparency to the pharmacy 
program.  We have additional steps that we will need to take in order to make this 
program fully transparent,” said Commissioner Carol Steckel. “It is important that all 
stakeholders be involved in the discussions of solutions in this complex program in order 

===PAGE 2===
to carefully anticipate any potential unintended consequences that may increase the 
Medicaid budget, or reduce access to pharmacy services for our beneficiaries.”  
Various state Medicaid programs have raised questions about PBMs, particularly the 
percentage of pharmaceutical manufacturers’ rebates retained as profit versus the 
percentage of dollars used for reimbursement of pharmacy services and quality 
assurance. 
The PBMs negotiate rebates for various pharmaceutical drugs on the Medicaid 
approved list, as well as discounts for products and work needed to develop and 
maintain approved lists of drugs for health insurers.  In Kentucky, CVS/Caremark and 
ExpressScripts serve as the PBMs for the five MCOs operating in Kentucky.  
MCO beneficiaries fill almost 25 million prescriptions per year in Kentucky. 
In 2017, DMS received almost $1.3 billion in federal rebates from Medicaid managed 
care prescriptions.  PBMs also negotiate their own supplemental rebates with 
manufacturers. 
Among other things, the report states that many of the concerns affecting independent 
pharmacies cannot be seen in an analysis of this type. Direct and indirect remuneration 
fees, or after point of sale fees, are not captured accurately. Pharmacy organizations 
within the Commonwealth have reported that these retroactive fees assessed by PBMs 
to independent pharmacies are hurting their current practices.  
“PBMs provide valuable services to the MCOs they serve and to Medicaid beneficiaries,” 
concluded Commissioner Steckel. “It is important that we are able to monitor these 
services and payments in response to our fiduciary responsibility to Kentucky 
taxpayers.” 
The report was developed after analyzing the data newly available under Senate Bill 5, 
legislation passed in 2018 that provided for more transparency in Kentucky’s Medicaid 
pharmaceutical benefit program.  A full version of the report can be found online here - 
https://chfs.ky.gov/agencies/ohda/Documents1/CHFS_Medicaid_Pharmacy_Pricing.pdf. 
===PAGE 3===
-30- 
The Cabinet for Health and Family Services is home to most of the state's human 
services and healthcare programs, including the Department for Medicaid Services, the 
Department for Community Based Services the Department for Public Health, the 
Department for Aging and Independent Living and the Department for Behavioral 
Health, Developmental and Intellectual Disabilities. CHFS is one of the largest agencies 
in state government, with nearly 8,000 full- and part-time employees located across the 
Commonwealth focused on improving the lives and health of Kentuckians. 
  
  
  
  
 
 