
===PAGE 1===
 

===PAGE 2===
 
===PAGE 3===
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 
Executive Summary ........................................................................................................................................ 1 
Conclusions .............................................................................................................................................. 4 
Recommendations .................................................................................................................................... 4 
Auditor of State Report 
Background ............................................................................................................................................... 6 
Data Transparency ................................................................................................................................... 9 
Disconnect Between Pharmacy Reimbursement and Medicaid Program Costs  ..................................... 11 
Potential Conflict of Interest ...................................................................................................................... 13  
Impact of Reductions in Pharmacy Reimbursement on Access to Care .................................................. 14 
Federal Initiatives...................................................................................................................................... 16 
Action Taken by the Ohio Department of Medicaid .................................................................................. 16 
Medicaid Initiatives in Other States .......................................................................................................... 17 
Recommendations .................................................................................................................................... 18 
Matters for Further Study .......................................................................................................................... 19 
Appendix A: Analysis of Maximum Allowable Cost Lists for One Week Period ....................................... 21 
Appendix B: Minimum and Maximum Spread by Quarter and Drug Type  ............................................... 22 
Appendix C: Spread by County ................................................................................................................ 23  
Appendix D: Spread by Managed Care Plan ........................................................................................... 24  
Appendix E: Regions and Counties .......................................................................................................... 25 
Appendix F: Pharmacy Closures by Region ............................................................................................. 26 
 
===PAGE 4===
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 
 
===PAGE 5===
Ohio’s Medicaid Managed Care Pharmacy Services 
 
 
Page 1 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 
Overview of Pharmacy Benefit Managers 
The Ohio Department of Medicaid (Department) requires Managed Care Plans  (Plans) to offer 
prescription drug benefits.  However, these Plans contract third party service organizations , known as 
Pharmacy Benefit Managers (PBMs) , to manage prescription drug benefits on their behalf . PBMs offer a 
variety of services , including but not limited to:  claim adjudications; customer service or call centers; 
clinical services such as prior authorizations; drug utilization reviews; and mail -order and specialty 
pharmacies. While Plans outsource these services to PBMs, the Plans remain responsible for the 
compliance and accuracy of the services a PBM performs pursuant to the Plans’ agreements with the 
Department. 
 
PBMs provide cost -cutting measures  to the insurance plans  by establishing pharmacy networks.  These 
networks give PBMs purchasing power, allowing them to negotiate deeply-discounted prescription 
coverage for the insurance plans and their customers.  PBMs can also negotiate manufacturer rebates 
directly with the pharmaceutical company to further reduce prescr iption drug costs.  These services allow 
PBMs to generate revenue through administration and service fees charged to insurance plan sponsors 
for processing prescriptions; through operation of their own mail -order and specialty pharmacies; and on 
the margin between the amount charged to insurance plan sponsors  and the amount paid out to 
pharmacies for a prescription (also referred to as “spread pricing”).  
 
PBMs were originally designed to reduce administrative costs in administering a prescription drug benefit 
program. However, PBMs have grown and now have substantial profitmaking ability  through price 
spreading and rebates, which are payments negotiated directly with pharmaceutical manufacturers . Also, 
many pharmacy owners maintain that PBMs have a conflict of interest since they can require customers 
to obtain prescriptions only from mail-order and specialty pharmacies they own.  
 
Amid growing concerns about  declining reimbursements to independent community pharmacies , 
members of the Ohio General Assembly asked the Auditor of State to independently analyze the following 
issues: 
 
1) Lack of transparent data on pharmacy services;  
 
2) Disconnect between pharmacy reimbursement and overall costs  to the Medicaid program (spread 
pricing);  
 
3) Potential conflict of interest related to a retail pharmacy chain that is affiliated with one of the 
Medicaid PBMs and reported reductions in pharmacy reimbursements; and 
 
4) Impact of reductions in pharmacy reimbursement on access to care , particularly in rural 
communities.  
 
In response to this request, the Auditor’s office reviewed pharmacy payment data related to the State’s 
Medicaid managed care program  and performed analyses of price spreading,  the reimbursements to 
pharmacies and the amounts paid to PBMs.  
 
Data Transparency 
While the Department requires Plans to adhere to the terms and conditions of the Medicaid program, it is 
difficult for the Department and the Plans to oversee compliance with prescription benefit programs 
outsourced to PBMs in part because they are not subject to industry -wide regulation. Exact terms of the 
financial arrangements for pharmacy services are hidden in part by the sheer number of entities involved 
in every transaction including managed care plans, PBMs, pharmacies, wholes alers, and manufacturers – 
===PAGE 6===
Ohio’s Medicaid Managed Care Pharmacy Services 
 
 
Page 2 
 
and by the contract provisions that keep nearly all of the details of these transactions confidential. These 
issues result in a lack of transparency in expenditure of Ohio’s Medicaid dollars. Conversely, PBMs 
maintain that disclosure and transparency in their industry  will lead to increased prescription drug prices 
because of reduced competition and increased overhead costs. 
 
Disconnect Between Pharmacy Reimbursement and Medicaid Program Costs  
The Plans reimburse PBMs on a pricing model that is based on a publically available price (the average 
wholesale price). PBMs reimburse pharmacies using different pricing models based on applicable 
contracts. As result, the amount reimbursed to a pharmacy by a PBM does not correlate to the amount 
paid to the PBM by the managed care plan for the same transaction. In other words, pharmacy 
reimbursements, and any increase or decrease to those reimbursements, has no impact on the overall 
Medicaid program’s costs as those are based only on the payment from the Plans to the PBMs.  
 
PBMs provide a range of administrative functions on behalf of Plans  and, in lieu of being paid a set fee for 
these functions; the PBM retains the difference between the Plan’s payment and the amount paid to the 
pharmacy – the spread. The Auditor’s office obtained and analyzed the difference between the payment 
from the Plan to the PBM and the PBM’s payment to the pharmacy (the price spread data). Below is a 
summary of our analysis and illustrates the price spread significance and profitmaking potential for PBMs.  
 
Average Spread by Quarter and by Drug Type from April 1, 2017 through March 31, 2018 
Quarter  
Average Spread  
Brand Generic  Specialty  
Total Average 
Spread for All 
Claims 
4/1/2017-
6/30/2017 $2.11 $5.39 $30.12 $5.09 
7/1/2017-
9/30/2017 $2.03 $5.71 $31.91 $5.35 
10/1/2017-
12/31/2017 $1.57 $7.10 $31.24 $6.47 
1/1/2018-
3/31/2018 $1.62 $6.48 $46.04 $6.01 
 Yearly Total  $1.85 $6.14 $33.49 $5.71 
     
 Brand Generic  Specialty  Totals 
Number of 
Prescriptions 5,268,144 33,913,042 197,408 39,378,594 
Percentage of 
Claims 13.4% 86.1% 0.50% 100% 
Amount Paid by 
Plans (millions) $1,246.1 $662.7 $617.6 $2,526.5 
Total Spread 
(millions) $9.8 $208.4 $6.6 $224.8 
Spread Relative 
to Total Paid 
Amount by Drug 
Type 0.8% 31.4% 1.1% 8.9% 
  
Potential Conflict of Interest  
We further compared the spread resulting from  payments from Caremark PCS Health, L.L.C. ( CVS 
Caremark) and OptumRx to CVS pharmacies and independent community pharmacies due to allegations 
of preferential treatment for CVS pharmacies. For this analysis, we grouped pharmacies into regions.   
===PAGE 7===
Ohio’s Medicaid Managed Care Pharmacy Services 
 
 
Page 3 
 
Spread Analysis by Region and Pharmacy Type 
  CVS Pharmacies  Independent Pharmacies  
Region  Brand  Generic  Specialty  Brand  Generic  Specialty  
Metro  $2.04 $5.49 $57.02 $1.67 $5.50 $43.67 
       
Central  $1.60 $5.83 $66.58 $1.80 $5.11 $24.21 
Northeast  $2.51 $5.60 $50.68 $3.55 $6.71 $39.14 
Northwest  $4.85 $7.13 $43.50 $3.71 $6.69 $25.32 
Southeast  $1.91 $5.58 $62.92 $1.88 $4.90 $43.28 
Southwest  $2.06 $5.57 $50.19 $1.77 $5.27 $31.32 
Overall Average  
Without Metro $2.37 $5.74 $53.42 $2.57 $5.80 $35.19 
Overall Average  
All  $2.22 $5.63 $55.09 $2.10 $5.66 $39.08 
 
Based on this data, the difference between the Plan’s payment to the PBM and the amount paid to the 
pharmacy (the spread) is similar for brand and generic drugs between CVS pharmacies and independent 
pharmacies. In comparison the spread is greater  with CVS pharmacies for specialt y drugs ; however, 
caution should be used with this analysis  as it does not reflect all transactions that occur between a 
pharmacy and a PBM. For example, t he spread analysis does not include the direct and indirect 
remuneration (DIR) fee
1 paid by the pharm acy to the PBM or other contractual arrangement s that could 
impact final payments. According to the PBMs, the unit cost reimbursement is not driven by region , and 
the maximum allowable cost reimbursement is the same for all independents by drug across all regions.  
 
Impact of Reductions in Pharmacy Reimbursement on Access to Care 
According to data maintained by the Ohio Board of Pharmacy 2, 132 independent community pharmacies, 
78 small chain pharmacies and 161 large chain pharmacies have closed in Ohio since 2013. 
 
 
  
                                                      
1 DIR fee is the terminology used to categorize certain pharmacy network participation fees and the 
reconciliation of certain contractual terms with actual reimbursement. 
2 The Board considers an independent community pharmacy as one outlet, a small chain p harmacy as 
having two to 11 outlets and a large chain pharmacy as having 12 or more outlets. The Pharmacy Board 
licenses other terminal distributers of dangerous drugs such as veterinary clinics, hospitals, physician 
(prescriber) offices, and nursing homes . This data in this report did not include these other types of 
terminal distributers.  
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
# of Closures 
Year 
Pharmacy Closures by Type and Year 
Independent
Pharmacies
Large Chain
Pharmacies
Small Chain
Pharmacies
*2018 Numbers only include figures from January through May 2018 
===PAGE 8===
Ohio’s Medicaid Managed Care Pharmacy Services 
 
 
Page 4 
 
Conclusions 
• The Auditor of State’s office obtain ed data on Plans’ payments to the PBMs and the PBMs’ 
payments to pharmacies and determined that the data was sufficiently reliable for the calculation 
of spread pricing. The overall average spread of $5.71 is consistent with the average reported by 
the Department; however, the Auditor of State’s analysis noted that the spread was higher 
($6.14) for generic drugs which constituted over 86 percent of prescriptions. The Department  
recently contracted with an independent vendor to analyze the Medicaid pharmacy spread. Based 
on this vendor’s market intelligence, the costs for the administrative fees covered by the spread 
would be from $0.95 to $1.903 per prescription, which is one-third of the pharmacy spread passed 
down in Ohio’s Medicaid managed care program.  According to the Plans, these administrative 
fees may vary based on other pricing considerations. Although this figure may not include all of 
services performed by a PBM, it suggests  Ohio’s current spread may be excessive and warrants 
the State taking further action to mitigate the impact on the Medicaid program.   
 
• Data on pharmacy closures coincide s with concerns expressed by pharmacists regarding 
reductions in reimbursements. However, this data does not show causality and does not include 
data on pharmacy openings. Further research is needed to determine the factors that led to these 
closures. While the Auditor of State’s analysis show s differences in the spread by region , the 
spread analysis completed for this report was for a limited time frame.  Representatives from the 
Plans indicated no access issues at this time. 
 
• While much attention has been focused on the spread, it does not provide a complete picture of 
pharmacy costs and PBM compensation.  There are a number of additional factors that impact 
PBM revenues and pharmacy reimbursements that were outside of the scope of this r eport, such 
as rebates, additional Plan fees, and pharmacy fees. The Ohio Legislature should take steps to 
mandate the reporting of additional statistical and financial data that would provide a more 
complete understanding. 
 
• Additional concerns regarding pharmacy services were expressed by stakeholders or identified in 
industry publications which included rebates and rebate audits, automatic refills and impact of 
spread contracting on the medical loss ratio requirement for managed care organizations. In 
addition, the Auditor of State noted that the PBM contracts do not i nclude any provision 
prohibiting the sale of de-identified data by a PBM to a third party. In addition, v arious practices 
were identified as indications of  potential conflicts of interest that could impact pharmacy services 
in the Medicaid program and other publically funded health care. These concerns were outside of 
the scope of this review and are noted as issues for further study.  
 
Recommendations 
The Auditor of State offers the following r ecommendations for the Ohio Legislature.  Additional 
recommendations for the Ohio Department of Medicaid can be found on page 18 .  
1. ADDITIONAL AUDIT REQUIREMENT  - The State should require that the Department engage an 
independent audit entity to perform periodic compliance audits of each PBM that contracts with a 
managed care plan. The Department should establish the scope of the compliance examinations. The 
compliance audits should provide greater assurance about the PBMs' compliance with State 
requirements. The Department should develop, document, and implement a monitoring process to 
ensure that the Plans correct any findings from those audits.  
 
2. ADDITIONAL STATISTICAL AND FINANCIAL REPORTING REQUIREMENTS  - The State should 
go beyond monitoring the spread and obtain statistics and financial information that include 
transactions that occur outside of claims adjudication. This would give a more accurate picture of 
actual reimbursement to pharmacies for services rendered. We recommend that the Department 
require the Plans to report financial terms and payment arrangements they have with its PBM and 
                                                      
3 This estimate of fees has not been independently verified by the Auditor of State.  
===PAGE 9===
Ohio’s Medicaid Managed Care Pharmacy Services 
 
 
Page 5 
 
prescription drug manufacturers, or labelers, including formulary management, drug- switch programs, 
educational support, claims processing, pharmacy network fees,  data sales fees, and all  other fees. 
The Department should also include language ensuring that it has the right to audit this data at any 
time. The confidentiality of the information disclosed by the Plans should be maintained, to the extent 
that the information is protected under state or federal law. 
 
3. ANALYSIS OF ALTERNATE CONTRACT MODEL  - The State should perform an analysis to identify 
the costs and benefits of requiring pass through contracting for its pharmacy services and report on 
those results including a detail of the methodology used for the analysis. In pass through contracting, 
the PBM charges the Plan  a flat administrative fee per claim or per member and then passes the 
exact price paid to the pharmacy through to the Plan . In the interim, the Department should work with 
its Plans and the PBMs to ensure that reimbursement methodologies  reflect reasonable costs 
associated with providing the service. 
 
In addition, the State should engage an independent third party to conduct a complete analysis of  the 
impact of moving pharmacy services to a fee- for-service model similar to the change implemented in 
West Virginia. The HealthPlan Data Solutions (HDS) executive summary contains a fee- for-service 
comparison; however, notes that the comparison is incomplete and recommends a follow -up analysis 
that incorporates the impact of rebates. The Auditor of State requested a copy of the full report 
developed by HDS but the full report is not yet available. Without the detailed methodology of the 
analysis performed by HDS, the Auditor of State cannot comment on or evaluate its fee- for-service 
pricing comparison. 
===PAGE 10===
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 
 
 
  
===PAGE 11===
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OHIO'S MEDICAID MANAGED CARE PHARMACY SERVICES 
 
 
AUDITOR OF STATE REPORT
===PAGE 12===
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK  
===PAGE 13===
Ohio’s Medicaid Managed Care Pharmacy Services 
 
 Page 6 
 
BACKGROUND 
 
Based on request s from State legislators, the Auditor of State reviewed data regarding payment for 
pharmacy services under the State’s Medicaid managed care program. Legislative concerns have been 
raised related to reimbursements to pharmacies and the amounts paid to pharmacy benefit managers 
(PBMs) by managed care plans ( Plans or MCPs). The objective of this report is to increase the 
transparency surrounding the reimbursement of pharmacy services. 
 
State auditors conducted research on pharmacy -related topics, reviewed contracts and analyzed relevant 
data. We intervie wed external entities , including the Ohio Department of Medicaid ( Department); Ohio’s 
five Medicaid managed care plans 4; CaremarkPCS Health, L.L.C. ( CVS Caremark ) and OptumRx; 
representatives of the Ohio Pharmacists Association;  individual pharmacists; Mer idianRx, a Michigan-
based PBM; and the Independent Pharmacy Cooperative. In addition, we spoke with representatives of 
other state Medicaid agencies which have implemented changes to address similar concerns regarding 
payment for pharmacy services.  
 
We selectively tested pharmacy services under the State’s Medicaid managed care program under the 
authority of Ohio Revised Code § 117.11(B). However, our objective is not to opine on any aspect of 
these services . This report includes a compilation of non- audited information from multiple sources . 
Observations have been drawn from the Auditor of State analysis of independently obtained, non-audited 
information. 
 
Terminology and Abbreviations Used in the Report 
Abbreviation Terminology Definition 
AWP Average Wholesale Price  A publically available benchmark used for the pricing and 
reimbursement of drugs which does not include discounts 
or rebates. Described as the “sticker price.”  
Brand Brand-name Drug A drug originally discovered and developed by a 
pharmaceutical company and marketed under a 
proprietary, trademark-protected name. 
Encounter Encounter Data Encounter data are the records of services delivered to 
Medicaid beneficiaries enrolled in managed care plans that 
receive a capitated, per-member-per-month payment. 
These records allow the Medicaid agency to track the 
services received by members enrolled in managed care. 
Encounter data typically come from billed claims that 
providers submit to managed care plans to be paid for their 
services. 
FFS Fee-For-Service Payment method in which providers are paid for each 
covered service such as an office visit, test, or procedure 
according to rates set by the state. 
Generic Generic Drug A drug that is identical to a traditional brand-name drug in 
dosage, safety, strength, route of administrations, quality, 
performance characteristics and intended use. 
MCP Managed Care Plan Medicaid managed care provides for the delivery of 
Medicaid health benefits and additional services through 
contracted arrangements between state Medicaid agencies 
and managed care organizations that accept a set per 
member per month (capitation) payment for these services. 
                                                      
4 Buckeye Community Health Plan, CareSource, Molina Healthcare, Paramount Advantage and United 
Healthcare Community Plan 
 We also reviewed pharmacy claims from Ohio’s sixth managed care plan, Aetna, and confirmed that the 
principle payer for those services was the Medicare program. 
===PAGE 14===
Ohio’s Medicaid Managed Care Pharmacy Services 
 
 Page 7 
 
Abbreviation Terminology Definition 
MAC Maximum Allowable Cost A pharmacy reimbursement limit, established by the PBM, 
for a particular strength and dosage of a generic drug that 
is available from multiple manufacturers with potentially 
different list prices. 
NADAC National Average Drug 
Acquisition Cost 
The average price pharmacies pay to acquire a drug from a 
wholesaler or manufacturer. It is calculated from the 
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) monthly 
survey of pharmacies and includes only discounts received 
by pharmacies at a drug’s acquisition. 
PBM Pharmacy Benefit 
Manager  
A third-party administrator of prescription drug programs for 
insurance companies. Duties generally include processing 
pharmacy benefit claims, developing formularies and 
negotiating drug prices with drug manufacturers.  
PSAO Pharmacy Service 
Administrative 
Organization 
These organizations negotiate and enter into contracts with 
third-party payers on behalf of member pharmacies. PSAO 
services are intended to achieve contract and payment 
efficiencies for both independent pharmacies and third-
party payers or their PBMs. 
PDL Preferred Drug List A list of drugs designated as preferred based on formulary 
review of efficacy, safety and cost considerations. 
Prior Auth. Prior Authorization An evaluation of the drug treatment before the treatment 
starts and typically requires action from the physician, 
pharmacist or patient to obtain coverage. 
Specialty Specialty Drug Drugs that treat chronic, complex or life-threatening 
conditions, are typically costly, and require intensive clinical 
monitoring, complex patient actions and/or special handling 
by the pharmacy. 
Spread Spread Pricing A type of contracting in which the amount paid by the 
managed care plan to the PBM for a specific prescription is 
different than the amount paid by the PBM to the pharmacy 
for the same prescription.  
Wholesaler Wholesaler  An entity engaged in wide distribution of prescription drugs 
from manufacturers, usually to retail community 
pharmacies, distributors and others responsible for 
distributing pharmaceuticals. 
 
Ohio Medicaid Pharmacy Costs 
Table 1 shows the number of Medicaid prescriptions and the corresponding amount paid for calendar 
years 2016 and 2017 along with the amount of rebates collected and discounts. It should be noted that 
the rebates and discounts shown are not directly tied to the amount paid by year due to differences in 
timing and processing of rebates and discounts.  
 
The data shows that the total amount paid increased by 1 2 percent from 2016 to 2017 . According to the 
State Drug Utilization Data - National Totals reported by the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services, 
the average increase in drug spending reported by all states was 4.4 percent. Ohio’s Medicaid increase in 
costs is almost three times this national average; however, the data also shows that the increase in the 
number of Medicaid prescriptions i n Ohio increased by almost five times the national average. The  
Department’s caseload reports indicate a two percent decrease in Medicaid eligibles between December 
2016 and December 2017. 
  
===PAGE 15===
Ohio’s Medicaid Managed Care Pharmacy Services 
 
 Page 8 
 
Table 1: Medicaid Pharmacy Costs 
  2016 2017 Percent Change 
Number of Prescriptions  58,535,755 62,789,010 7.3% 
Amount Paid $3,633,495,190 $4,074,728,913 12.1% 
Rebates/Discounts ($1,796,102,667) ($1,977,937,618) 10.1% 
Total Net Paid $1,837,392,523 $2,096,791,295 14.1% 
1 Providers can bill Medicaid program for up to 365 days after service delivery (see Ohio Admin Code § 
5160-1-19) so data for 2017 is still subject to change.  
2 Data is from the Medicaid Information Technology System (Fund Group: Drugs), the OAKS BI REV-
0004 Revenue Accounting Entries Report and the five MCPs. The statistics include both managed care 
(encounter) and fee-for-service data. 
Ohio’s Medicaid Pharmacy Services - Fee-For-Service 
In October 2011, the Plans became responsible for drug coverage to Ohio Medicaid enrollees. While the 
majority of Ohio’s Medicaid services are provided through the Plans, there remain some services paid 
directly by the Department on a fee- for-service basis. The Department contracts with a third party 
administrator, Change Healthcare Pharmacy Solutions, Inc., for administrative and claims services for 
pharmacy benefits reimbursed on the fee- for-service basis. One key service, monitored by the 
Department and performed by this third party administrator is the processing and collection of rebates. In 
the State of Ohio Single Audit for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2017
5, the Auditor of State recommended 
that the Department strengthen current internal control procedures over drug rebate contract monitoring 
and identified four specific improvement areas. In addition, the recommendation noted that monitoring 
procedures performed should be documented and should be updated on a regular basis to address any 
changes in contractual requirements. 
 
Ohio’s Medicaid Pharmacy Services - Managed Care 
The Department  pays a capitated payment
6 (a per member /per month payment) to the Plans for the 
delivery of Medicaid health benefits , including pharmacy benefits.  In turn, each of the Plans contract with 
a PBM to manage its delivery of pharmacy services. United Healthcare Community Plan of Ohio  contracts 
with OptumRx, a UnitedHealth Group company. The remaining four Plans contract with CVS Caremark. 
The contracts identify similar types of services and responsibilities associated with the Plans and PBMs 
as summarized in Table 2. PBMs in turn contract with pharmacies, either directly or through a pharmacy 
service administration organization (PSAO) , which  negotiate and enter into contracts with third- party 
payers on behalf of member pharmacies.  
 
Table 2: Services and Responsibilities of Managed Care Plans and Pharmacy Benefit Managers  
  General Services/Responsibilities 
MCP Provides eligibility information, formulary management, coordination of benefits, and 
claims and rebate audits 
PBM Provides claims processing, drug utilization review, pharmacy network management 
maximum allowable cost list reporting, call center, rebate reporting, monitoring/auditing 
its pharmacy network, clinical services, prior authorization management, communication 
materials and operating mail order and specialty pharmacies. 
1 Summary of Information in Plan contracts with PBMs in effect during calendar years 2016 and 2017. 
                                                      
5 Full report found at https://ohioauditor.gov/auditsearch/detail.aspx?ReportID=136353 - see pages 77 to 
79.  
6 Capitated payments are fixed, pre- arranged monthly payments. In developing the per member/per 
month payment , the actuar ial firm reduces retail pharmacy expenditures by the supplemental rebate 
percentage and for uncollected co-pays.  
 
===PAGE 16===
Ohio’s Medicaid Managed Care Pharmacy Services 
 
 Page 9 
 
Pharmacies generally purchase drugs from wholesalers who purchase the drugs from manufacturers and 
receive rebates that originate from the manufacturer. Some pharmacies purchase drugs through a group 
purchasing organization. 
 
Chart 1  is an illustration of Ohio’s Medicaid Managed Care Program and provides an overview  of the 
multiple entities involved in pharmacy transactions and the interactions between these entities.  
 
Chart 1: Ohio’s Medicaid Managed Care System 
 
 
DATA TRANSPARENCY 
 
One concern expressed by state lawmakers is that payment for pharmacy services is convoluted and 
secretive because pricing and reimbursement methodologies are confidential and proprietary. Chart 1  
shows the many entities that touch a pharmacy transaction, most of which add expense, even though 
their specific costs are often unknown. For example, while we were able to obtain information on 
payments made by CVS Caremark to pharmacies, the Plans that paid CVS Caremark were not permitted 
by this PBM to see this information. 
 
Ohio Medicaid reimburses fee- for-service pharmacy services (not covered by managed care)  based on a 
two-part formula consisting of the ingredient cost of the drug and a dispensing f ee. The Department uses 
the National Average Drug Acquisition Cost (NADAC)  to set the ingredient cost . NADAC is published 
monthly by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services 7. The Department’s dispensing fee varies 
between $8.30 and $13.64 depending on the volume of prescriptions reported by the pharmacy. 
                                                      
7 Federal regulations allow states the flexibility to determine reimbursement amounts , although there is an 
upper limit that cannot be exceeded. 

===PAGE 17===
Ohio’s Medicaid Managed Care Pharmacy Services 
 
 Page 10 
 
In contrast, managed care plans contract with PBMs to provide pharmacy services and the contracts 
specify the payment structure for brand, generic  and specialty drugs. The negotiated rate represents an  
annual guaranteed rate and does not reflect the amount paid for a specific prescription on a given date. 
Additional fees, priced separately, are also paid by the Plans to the PBMs for various services, such as 
dispensing fees, special reports, manual claims processing and drug utilization review.  
 
During the period reviewed, the Plans paid more than $2.5 billion to  their PBMs. Chart 2  shows this 
amount broken down by drug type. T he highest percentage of dollars paid to PBMs was for brand drugs, 
followed by generic and specialty drugs. While brand drugs are prescribed less often than generics, their 
cost is much higher. 
 
 
PBMs also pay pharmacies based on a  two-part formula consisting of the ingredient cost of the drug and 
a dispensing fee.  One method used by PBMs to set the pricing for the ingredient cost uses a maximum 
allowable cost8 which is developed by a PBM based on its industry research and analysis. The maximum 
allowable cost list is a compilation of drugs with prices and their effective dates . The PBMs reported that 
they develop different lists to meet their contractual annual guarantees and the market characteristic of 
their pharmacy networks such as volume and predicted acquisition costs. This results in pharmacies 
being paid diff erent amounts by the PBMs for the same drug on the same day. The Auditor of State’s 
office obtained the maximum allowable cost lists used to price Ohio Medicaid pharmacy services from 
CVS Caremark and OptumRx for one week in November 2017. We noted that both CVS Caremark and 
OptumRx had multiple MAC lists which included different prices for the same drug across the lists. See 
Appendix A for additional information of the lists.  
 
In addition to the ingredient cost, the PBM pays the pharmacy a dispensing fee.  Both PBMs indicated 
their dispensing fees are set by contract.  
  
                                                      
8 According to CVS Caremark, depending on the contract, the pharmacy will be paid the lessor of several 
pricing models such as usual and customary, a percentage discount applied to average wholesal e price 
or maximum allowable cost. It is possible that the maximum allowable cost may not be the lowest.  
Brand
Generic
Specialty
Chart 2: MCP Payments to PBMs by Drug Type 
49% 
25% 
26% 
===PAGE 18===
Ohio’s Medicaid Managed Care Pharmacy Services 
 
 Page 11 
 
DISCONNECT BETWEEN PHARMACY REIMBURSEMENT AND MEDICAID PROGRAM COSTS  
 
As requested by members of the Legislature, we calculated the pharmacy spread in the  state’s Medicaid 
managed care program. Spread pricing refers to a type of contracting in which the amount paid by the 
Plan to the PBM for a specific prescription is different than the amount paid by the PBM to the pharmacy 
for the same prescription. In lieu of the Plans paying for certain services, such as drug utilization review or 
claims processing, the PBM retains the spread amount.  Both CVS Caremark and OptumRx indicated that 
the spread pricing contract model best supports cost containment. 
 
While much attention has been focused on the spread, it does not provide a complete picture of 
pharmacy costs and PBM compensation.  There are a number of financial transactions that occur outside 
of the claims payment process that impact pharmacy costs and PBM revenues . For example, there are 
additional fees paid by the Plans to the PBMs a nd there are fees paid by pharmacies to the PBMs, 
including transaction fees, quality fees and fees related to contract performance. None of these fees are 
included in the spread. Other stat es have taken steps to go beyond a focus on the spread to look at a 
broader array of statistical and financial data (see Recommendation 3). 
 
The Auditor of State’s office received pharmacy data and performed the analysis shown in Table 3 for the 
period of April 1, 2017 through March 31, 2018. Auditors elected to use the same period selected by the 
Department to facilitate timely analysis for  this report and comparability. It should be noted that the period 
selected by the Department is an open billing period 9, meaning the data is subject to change.  (Note: This 
period includes increased reimbursement s made by PBMs to pharmacies for certain drugs in January 
2018, at the request of the Department.) 
 
We reviewed 39.3 million drug claims and determined the average spread by quarter , by drug type and 
the percentage of claims by drug type. This analysis 10 found the following: 
• Brand: Average spread per claim decreased by 23 percent from the 1st to last quarter.  
• Generic: Average spread per claim increased by 20 percent from the 1st to last quarter.  
• Specialty: Average spread per claim increased by 53 percent from the 1st to last quarter.11  
• Combined: Average spread per claim increased by 18 percent ( see Appendix B  for Minimum and 
Maximum Spread, Appendix C  for spread by county and Appendix D  for spread by managed care 
plan). 
 
  
                                                      
9 Providers can bill Medicaid program for up to 365 days after service delivery (see Ohio Admin Code § 
5160-1-19). 
10 The scope of this report did not include a detailed analysis as to the causality of these variances.  
11 Per contracts, many specialty drugs are filled by CVS Caremark’s specialty pharmacy. 
===PAGE 19===
Ohio’s Medicaid Managed Care Pharmacy Services 
 
 Page 12 
 
Table 3: Average Spread by Quarter and by Drug Type  
Quarter  
Average Spread  
Brand Generic  Specialty  
Total Average 
Spread for All 
Claims 
4/1/2017-
6/30/2017 $2.11 $5.39 $30.12 $5.09 
7/1/2017-
9/30/2017 $2.03 $5.71 $31.91 $5.35 
10/1/2017-
12/31/2017 $1.57 $7.10 $31.24 $6.47 
1/1/2018-
3/31/2018 $1.62 $6.48 $46.04 $6.01 
 Yearly Total4  $1.85 $6.14 $33.49 $5.71 
     
 Brand Generic  Specialty  Totals 
Number of 
Prescriptions 5,268,144 33,913,042 197,408 39,378,594 
Percentage of 
Claims 13.4% 86.1% 0.50% 100% 
Amount Paid by 
Plans (millions) $1,246.1 $662.7 $617.6 $2,526.5 
Total Spread 
(millions) $9.8 $208.4 $6.6 $224.8 
Spread Relative 
to Total Paid 
Amount by Drug 
Type 0.8% 31.4% 1.1% 8.9% 
1 Source: Data provided by CVS Caremark and OptumRx 
2 Based on the period of April 1, 2017 through March 31, 2018 
3 We matched the spread data with the Medicaid Information Technology System using the pharmacy 
provider number. We found 334,475 services (0.8 percent) with no matching provider identification and 
removed those services for the purpose of this analysis. 
4 Yearly totals are not an average and are weighted based on total records and amount paid.  
 
 
Chart 3 shows the total spread by drug type and highlights that 93 percent of the total spread was from 
generic drugs. This is to be expected because the overall spend is so much higher for this drug type. 
 
 
 
4% 
93% 
3%  
Chart 3: Percentage of Total Spread by Drug Type 
Brand
Generic
Specialty
===PAGE 20===
Ohio’s Medicaid Managed Care Pharmacy Services 
 
 Page 13 
 
POTENTIAL CONFLICT OF INTEREST  
 
Auditors further broke down the PBM data by region in order to examine concerns regarding independent 
community pharmacies being targeted with lower reimbursements . Table 4 contains the spread analysis 
by region and includes a comparison of CVS pharmacies v s. independent community pharmacies within 
each specific region (see Appendix E  for description of regions) . Based on this data, the difference 
between the Plan’s payment to the PBM and the amount paid to the pharmacy (the spread) is similar for 
brand and generic drugs between CVS pharmacies and independent pharmacies. In c omparison the 
spread is greater with CVS pharmacies for specialty drugs. 
 
Table 4: Spread Analysis by Region and Pharmacy Type 
  CVS Pharmacies  Independent Pharmacies  
Region  Brand  Generic  Specialty  Brand  Generic  Specialty  
Metro  $2.04 $5.49 $57.02 $1.67 $5.50 $43.67 
       
Central  $1.60 $5.83 $66.58 $1.80 $5.11 $24.21 
Northeast  $2.51 $5.60 $50.68 $3.55 $6.71 $39.14 
Northwest  $4.85 $7.13 $43.50 $3.71 $6.69 $25.32 
Southeast  $1.91 $5.58 $62.92 $1.88 $4.90 $43.28 
Southwest  $2.06 $5.57 $50.19 $1.77 $5.27 $31.32 
Overall Average  
Without Metro $2.37 $5.74 $53.42 $2.57 $5.80 $35.19 
Overall Average  
All  $2.22 $5.63 $55.09 $2.10 $5.66 $39.08 
1 Source: Data files submitted by CVS Caremark and OptumRx  
2 Based on the period of April 1, 2017 through March 31, 2018 
 
Spread Analysis Conclusion 
Caution should be used in drawing conclusions based on this pharmacy spread data as it does not reflect 
all transactions that occur between a pharmacy and a PBM. For example, the data used for this spread 
analysis does not include direct and indirect remuneration (DIR) 12 fees paid back to the PBM by the 
pharmacy. In addition, per contracts, many specialty drugs are filled by  CVS Caremark’s specialty 
pharmacy – which is a CVS specialty pharmacy both of which are subsidiaries of CVS Health 
Corporation. This analysis does not address the significant rebates offered to PBMs by the drug 
manufacturers. Finally, there are other additional contractual arrangements that could impact final 
payments. To fully address the concerns raised recently would take access to financial and statistical 
data from the Plans, PBMs and pharmacies that are currently inaccessible. See Appendix F
 for spread 
analysis by region and quarter. 
 
We were unable to benchmark the Ohio Medicaid spread data as Ohio is the first state to release a full 
year’s data on the pharmacy spread. Virginia and Kentucky have analyzed the pharm acy spread in their 
Medicaid programs and are planning to release reports in the next few months and this may provide 
some comparative basis. The Department recently contracted with HealthPlan Data Solutions, LLC to 
analyze the Medicaid pharmacy spread. Based on this vendor’s market intelligence, the costs for the 
administrative fees covered by the spread would be from $0.95 to $1.90 13 per prescription, which is one-
third of the pharmacy spread passed down in Ohio’s Medicaid managed care program. Although th is 
figure may not include all of services performed by a PBM, it suggests Ohio’s current spread may be  
excessive and warrants the State taking further action to mitigate the impact on the Medicaid program 
(see Recommendations section).  
                                                      
12 DIR fee is the terminology us ed to categorize certain pharmacy ne twork participation fees and the 
reconciliation of certain contractual terms with actual reimbursement. 
13 This estimate of fees has not been independently verified by the Auditor of State. .  
===PAGE 21===
Ohio’s Medicaid Managed Care Pharmacy Services 
 
 Page 14 
 
IMPACT OF REDUCTIONS IN PHARMACY REIMBURSEMENT ON ACCESS TO CARE   
 
According to the Ohio Board of Pharmacy’s data, there were 2,088 active independent, small chain and 
large chain pharmacies licensed in Ohio as of May 15, 2018 14. Of these 2,088 pharmacies, the majority 
were large chain pharmacies. The Board considers an independent community pharmacy as one outlet, a 
small chain pharmacy as having two to 11 outlets and a large chain pharmacy as having 12 or more 
outlets. Chart 4 shows the percentage of pharmacies in Ohio by pharmacy type.  
 
 
The Ohio Board of Pharmacy also maintains data on pharmacy closures. This data shows 132  
independent community  pharmacies, 78 small chain pharmacies  and 161 large chain pharmacies have 
closed in Ohio since 2013 . Chart 5  shows pharmacy closures by pharmacy type and year. The data 
shows a significant increase in large chain pharmacy closures in 2016 ; however, the increase was due to 
CVS pharmacy acquiring Target pharmacy locations. This acquisition made up 81.4 percent of t he large 
chain closures in 2016 and, while identified as closures in the data, there was no resulting reduction in 
pharmacies. 
 
 
 
                                                      
14 The Pharmacy Board licenses other terminal distributers of dangerous drugs such as veterinary clinics, 
hospitals, physician (prescriber) offices, and nursing homes . This data in this report did not include these 
other types of terminal distributers. 
Chart 4: Active Pharmacies by Type 
Independent Community
Pharmacy (393)
Large Chain Pharmacy (1,556)
Small Chain Pharmacy (139)
7% 19% 
74% 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
# of Closures 
Year 
Chart 5: Pharmacy Closures by Type and Year 
Independent
Pharmacies
Large Chain
Pharmacies
Small Chain
Pharmacies
*2018 Numbers only include figures from January through May 2018. 
===PAGE 22===
Ohio’s Medicaid Managed Care Pharmacy Services 
 
 Page 15 
 
Auditors also analyzed closures geographically to show any regional impact of these closures. We noted 
that the northeast region had the hi ghest number of closures with 133, followed by 93 closures in the 
southwest region, 63  closures in the central  region, 55 in northwest region and 27  closures in the 
southeast region. The data also shows a spike in closures in the northeast region in 2016.  See Appendix 
F for closure numbers by region.  The 2018 data includes only January through May 2018 so does not 
represent a full year. 
 
 
Summary on Pharmacy Closure Data 
Table 4 above shows that the spread for independent community pharmacies in the northeast and 
northwest regions for this 12 month period was higher than other regions for both brand drugs (69 and 77 
percent, respectively ) and generic s (19 and 18 percent, respectively ). This raises questi ons as to why 
pharmacies in these  regions are reimbursed at lower amounts  for these two drug types . The pharmacy 
closure data shows that 48 percent of Ohio independent pharmacies closed since 2013 were located i n 
these two regions. Lower reimbursements may result in future closures so continued monitoring of 
pharmacy closures would be beneficial.  The trend  in independent pharmacy closures  shown in the 
Pharmacy Board’s data coincides  with concerns expressed by pharmacists regarding reductions in 
reimbursements. However this data does not show causality and further research is  needed to determine 
the factors that led to these closures. While the analysis did show differences in the spread by region,  the 
spread analy sis completed for this report was for a limited time frame and does not reflect the final 
reimbursements to pharmacies. 
  
0
5
10
15
20
25
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
# of Closures 
Year 
Chart 6: Pharmacy Closures by Region and Year 
Northeast
Southeast
Southwest
Northwest
Central
===PAGE 23===
Ohio’s Medicaid Managed Care Pharmacy Services 
 
 Page 16 
 
INITIATIVES, RECOMMENDATIONS AND ISSUES FOR FURTHER STUDY  
 
Federal Initiatives 
A report released from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services – Office of Inspector 
General15 (HHS-OIG) found reimbursement for brand- name drugs increased between 2011 and 2015, 
even with lower inflation and decreased drug utilization.  The report analyzed pharmacy costs in the 
Medicare program but i ts findings raise concerns for the Medicaid program  as well. The report notes that 
reimbursement increased 62 percent over 2011 to 2015, even when factoring in rebates, while the 
number of prescriptions went down 17 percent. Per unit costs for brand- name drugs increased nearly six 
times faster than inflation from 2011- 2015 and t hese cost increases were similar to increases in 
manufacturer prices. The HHS-OIG report highlights the impact that drug manufacturers and wholesalers 
have on increasing pharmaceutical costs. While this Auditor of State report focuses on PBMs, these other 
sectors of the pharmacy industry could have higher profit margins than PBMs and be a key factor in 
Medicaid pharmacy costs. Massachusetts  recently submitted a proposal to negotiate d irectly with 
manufacturers on the price of drugs and, under certain conditions, to have drug manufacturers justify 
drug prices, attend public hearings and make information on pricing available to the public  (see Medicaid 
Initiatives in Other States). 
 
Recently, it was announced that the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) will take steps to 
lower drug costs including: 
 
• Streamlining and accelerating the approval process for over-the-counter drugs;  
• Increased reliance on value-based pricing;  
• Ending the current Medicaid rebate cap; and  
• Including drug maker copay discount cards in Medicaid best-price calculations.  
 
Action Taken by the Ohio Department of Medicaid as of August 13, 2018 
The Department has focused its monitoring on the contract with the Plans and has not extended those 
monitoring activities to subcontractors (such as PBMs) used by the Plans to carry out core functions of 
the State’s Medicaid program. In response to concerns around pharm acy reimbursements, the 
Department amended the agreement with the Plans in April 2018 to include additional disclosure 
requirements for pharmacy benefits. PBMs are now required to disclose differences between the amounts 
paid to a pharmacy and the amount c harged to the plan sponsor (the spread pricing) and whether it uses 
the same maximum allowable cost list for billing a Plan compared to reimbursing a pharmacy.  Each Plan 
is to develop and publish on its website the requirements and appeal process for pharm acy providers. 
The amended agreement indicates that upon request, the Plans will provide  all financial terms and 
arrangements for payment of any kind that apply between the Plan (or the Plan’s first tier, downstream 
and related entity) and any provider of a Medicaid service. 
  
The new agreement also adds a requirement effect ive July 1, 2018 that for sub- contracted payment 
arrangements in which a vendor is responsible for paying claims on behalf of the Plan, the encounter data 
must include the amounts paid b y the vendor. This should ensure that the Plans  submit amounts paid by 
the PBM to the pharmacy in future encounter data.  
  
                                                      
15 Increases in Reimbursement for Brand- Name Drugs in Part D (June 2018 OEI -03-15-00080 
https://oig.hhs.gov/oei/reports/oei-03-15-00080.pdf 
 
 
===PAGE 24===
Ohio’s Medicaid Managed Care Pharmacy Services 
 
 Page 17 
 
Medicaid Initiatives in Other States  
Other state Medicaid programs have taken steps to address concerns around costs of pharmacy 
services.  
 
• Kentucky: Passed legislation in 2018 to increase reporting requirements of PBMs. The legislation 
requires PBMs to provide the state’s Medicaid agency the total Medicaid dollars paid by the 
managed care organizations as well as  the detailed cost components of payments to pharmacies 
and all direct and indirect fees, charges and assessments a PBM imposes on a pharmacy.  
Officials from the state Medicaid agency are currently engaged in the development of a reporting 
mechanism to implement the recent legislation and define terms appropriately so that the correct 
data is obtained.  In addition, Kentucky  approves contracts between the managed care 
organizations and PBMs.  
 
• Massachusetts: In an attempt to control rapidly increasing pharmacy and high drug c osts, the 
state Medicaid agency submitted a waiver to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services 
(CMS) to implement a value- based pharmacy pricing model. Under this model, Massachusetts 
would have the ability to negotiate directly with manufacturers on the price of drugs and to 
exclude certain drugs from its preferred drug list under certain conditions. Under the proposal, if 
an agreement with drug manufacturers is not reached, manufacturers would be required to justify 
drug prices, may be required to a ttend public hearings and make information on drug pricing 
available to the public.  In its initial response, CMS did not approve the waiver as submitted. The 
final resolution was not known at the time of this report. Following Massachusetts, other states 
including Arizona announced intentions to request approval for new flexibilities in Medicaid drug 
coverage. 
 
• Texas: In 2014, Texas Medicaid added to and strengthened provisions in its contract with its 
managed care organizations to: 
 
• Prohibit contracting with PBMs using the spread pricing model; 
• Improve monitoring of PBMs; 
• Prohibit PBMs from charging pharmacies transaction fees; and 
• Ensure patient access to medications.  
 
Texas requires PBMs to submit quarterly financial and statistical reports in order to analyze their 
reimbursements to pharmacies compared to their reimbursements from the managed care 
organizations. 
  
Texas also passed legislation in 2017 that requires periodic audits of PBMs to obtain greater 
assurance about the effectiveness of the PBMs ' internal controls and compliance with state 
requirements. Representatives from the Texas Medicaid program stated that building positive 
relationships with PBMs and stakeholders through regular meetings and dialogue was important 
to obtain support for these changes and for the additional reporting and monitoring activities.  
 
• Virginia: This state added a provision to the budget bill in 2017 requiring the state Medicaid 
agency to provide quarterly reports on PBM claims data, the amount being paid to pharmacies, 
and the difference between those amounts (the spread). In October 2018, Virginia will release a 
report that will include a full year of data enabling officials to identify patterns and trends. In 
addition, Virginia is working to add a requirement for managed care organizations to report an 
itemization of all administrative fees, rebates, and processing charges associated with the claim.  
 
• West Virginia: In July of 2017, in response to increasing payments that the state determined were 
unsustainable, West Virginia moved pharmacy benefits from managed care back to fee- for-
service. To address concerns by the managed care organizations in relation to care coordination, 
the state added technology to enable the managed care organizations to view pharmacy data on 
a real -time basis. The state performed an analysis prior to implementing this change which 
===PAGE 25===
Ohio’s Medicaid Managed Care Pharmacy Services 
 
 Page 18 
 
indicated there would be savings to the state Medicaid program from this change; however, the 
actual impact of this change was not known at the time of this report.  
 
Recommendations 
1. SERVICE ORGANIZATION REPORT ON INTERNAL CONTROLS 
 
Service organizations provide services ranging from performing a specific task under the direction of 
an entity to replacing entire business units or functions of the entity. When the operating activity is not 
directly administered by the entity, such as when utilizing a service organization, it is critical that the 
appropriate controls are designed and implemented to reasonably ensure the service organization 
has adequate controls to a chieve management’s goals and objectives and complies with applicable 
laws and regulations. Service Organization Controls reports, known as SOC reports, help user 
organizations monitor their outsourced relationships and manage the associated risks. SOC -1 audits 
are performed over these service organizations to provide information about internal controls to 
management and to auditors who rely on the SOC -1 report results for the audit of the user entity’s 
financial statement. 
 
The Managed Care Plan Provider Agreement outlines the responsibility of the Plans in relation to 
pharmacy services and submission of encounter data regarding these services. These responsibilities 
include ensuring appropriate coverage of prescribed drugs, communications with members (Medicaid 
beneficiaries), conducting a drug utilization review program, and making payments to pharmacies. In 
order to meet the requirements related to pharmacy services, the Plans contract with PBMs to 
perform these required functions. Per the agreement, the Plan agrees to hold all subcontractors 
acting on its behalf in the performance of services responsible for adhering to the requirements.  
 
Without a SOC -1 audit, the Department may not have sufficient information to reasonably ensure 
controls are in place to ensure the integrity of the data processed, maintained, and reported by the 
Plans. Data errors could lead to undetected errors in calculation of the capitation payment and federal 
reporting. We recommend the Department take steps to ensure that an annual SOC -1 audit is 
completed over PBM services and activities, and to make this information available to auditors 
evaluating the encounter and financial data reported.  
 
2. ADDITIONAL AUDIT REQUIREMENT 
 
In addition to the SOC -1 audit, the State should require t hat the Department engage an independent 
audit entity to perform periodic compliance audits of each PBM that contracts with a managed care 
plan. The Department should establish the scope of the compliance examinations. The compliance 
audits should provide greater assurance about the PBMs' compliance with State requirements. The 
Department should develop, document, and implement a monitoring process to ensure that the Plans 
correct any findings from those audits. 
 
3. ADDITIONAL STATISTICAL AND FINANCIAL REPORTING REQUIREMENTS 
 
The State should go beyond monitoring the spread and obtain statistics and financial information that 
include transactions that occur outside of claims adjudication. This would give a more accurate 
picture of actual reimbursement to pharmacies for services rendered. We recommend that the 
Department require the P lans report financial terms and payment arrangements they have with its 
PBM and prescription drug manufacturer s, or labelers, including formulary management, drug- switch 
programs, educational support, claims processing, pharmacy network fees,  data sales fees, and all  
other fees. The Department should also include language ensuring that it has the right to audit this 
data at any time.  The confidentiality of the information disclosed by the Plans should be maintained, 
to the extent that the information is protected under state or federal law. 
 
 
 
 
===PAGE 26===
Ohio’s Medicaid Managed Care Pharmacy Services 
 
 Page 19 
 
4. DEVELOPMENT OF BENCHMARKS FOR MONITORING PHARMACY PAYMENTS  
 
If Ohio’s Plans continue to use spread pricing contracts, the Department should develop benchmarks 
or a performance scorecard to monitor spread pricing and price fluctuations. These benchmarks 
should include, at a minimum, spread by type of drug, by region, and by managed care plan. As other 
state Medicaid programs report out on pharm acy data/spread, Ohio could look to these states to 
benchmark its data. 
 
5. ANALYSIS OF ALTERNATE CONTRACT MODEL 
 
The State should perform an analysis to identify the costs and benefits of requiring pass through 
contracting for its pharmacy services and report on those results including a detail of the methodology 
used for the analysis. In pass through contracting, the PBM charges the Plan a flat administrative fee 
per claim or per member and then passes the exact price paid to the pharmacy through to the Plan. 
In the interim, the Department should work with its  Plans and the PBMs to ensure that reimbursement 
methodologies reflect reasonable costs associated with providing the service. 
 
In addition, the State should engage an independent third party to conduct a complete analysis of the 
impact of moving pharmacy services to a fee-for-service model similar to the change implemented in 
West Virginia. The HealthPlan Data Solutions (HDS) executive summary contains a fee- for-service 
comparison; however, notes that the comparison is incomplete and recommends a follow -up analysis 
that incorporates the impact of rebates. The Auditor of State requested a copy of the full report 
developed by HDS  but the full report is not yet available. Without the detailed methodology of the 
analysis performed by HDS, the Auditor of State cannot comment on or evaluate its fee- for-service 
pricing comparison. 
 
6. MONITOR OTHER STATE INITIATIVES  
 
The Department should continue to monitor approaches being tried in other states, such as the 
waiver request submitted by Massachusetts, and consider if application of any of these approaches 
would benefit Ohio. 
  
7. STRENGTHEN INTERNAL CONTROLS OVER DRUG REBATE CONTRACT MONITORING  
 
The Department should implement the recommendation regarding the State’s  own third party 
administrator contained in the State of Ohio Single Audit for the year ended June 30, 2017 and 
strengthen its current internal control procedures over drug rebate contract monitoring. The 
monitoring procedures performed should be documented to provide assurance they are performed 
consistently. Additionally, these procedures should be updated regularly to address any changes in 
the contract requirements. 
 
Issues for Further Study  
 
The following are issues that were identified but were not reviewed within the scope of this report. 
 
• Automatic Refills: This refers to allowing pharmacies to automatically refill prescriptions for certain 
medications without any customer action. Concerns with pharmacy automatic refill include the 
potential for st ockpiling and continued fill ing of discontinued medications which result s in 
increased costs and waste of prescription medications , as well as fraudulent resale. Two states 
reviewed by the Government Accounting Office, Florida and Arizona, have prohibited the 
practice. The impact of this practice on the Medicaid program is unknown, but automatic refills 
have been identified as a risk factor in fraud, waste and abuse.  
 
• Medical Loss Ratio:  The Medical Loss Ratio places a requirement on insurance companies to  
spend a set percent of premium dollars on medical care and health care quality improvement 
rather than administrative costs. Quality improving activities should be designed to improve health 
===PAGE 27===
Ohio’s Medicaid Managed Care Pharmacy Services 
 
 Page 20 
 
outcomes and be based on evidence based practices. The Department's contract with its Plans 
indicates that the minimum medical loss ratio shall not fall below 85 percent.  
 
During several interviews concerns were expressed that the current practice of spread pricing 
contracts impacted the medical loss ratio requirement. In addition, a 2017 presentation by the 
HHS/OIG identified one type of managed care fraud which included misrepresenting the ratio. 
Additional review of this issue is warranted if Ohio continues to allow spread pricing contracts to 
fully determine if these practices have any material impact on the medical loss ratio.  
 
• Rebates and Rebate Audits : A rebate is a di scount on a medication provided by a drug 
manufacturer in return for the manufacturer’s drug product being included on the preferred drug 
list. Since PBMs impact the managed care plan’s formularies, they can negotiate better prices for 
certain drugs. The Plan’s contracts address the sharing of rebates obtained by the PBMs.  
 
However, concerns were expressed around PBMs inappropriately withholding rebates and t his 
practice has been identified as a risk factor for fraud, waste and abuse.  In addition, research on 
PBMs noted practices that result in higher costs drugs with larger rebates being added to 
preferred drug lists that may increase overall costs.  Also, PBMs could be negotiating for 
additional discounts that are unknown to the Plans.  Others have raised concerns that PBMs are 
charging another fee (in addition to the supplemental rebates), renaming it as a transaction fee, 
and charging this directly to the manufacturer. 
 
Representatives of the Plans  discussed their rebate audit processes which differed in their scope 
and depth. If the state of Ohio were to perform rebate audits any discrepancies could be brought 
to light. Given the complexity and secrecy around rebates, the role of the rebate audit is 
significant. Rebates are used by  the actuarial firm that  calculates the per member/per month 
capitation payment. The significance of rebates on the capitation payment is unclear; however, 
further study of this issue is warranted to fully understand the impact on the Medicaid program.  
 
• Conflicts of Interest/Anti -Competitive Practices: This report presents data on pharmacy closures 
over past five plus years and spread pricing for a recent 12 month period; however, this high level 
review is not adequate to fully address the concerns that exist around conflict of interest and anti -
competitive practices. It should be noted that of the Medicaid PBMs operating in Ohio, CVS 
Caremark is the only PBM that shares ownership with a pharmacy, or put differently, CVS is the 
only retail pharmacy affiliated with a PBM (having the same parent company). Representatives of 
CVS Caremark interviewed as part of this report stated that a firewall is maintained between CVS 
Retail Pharmacies and CVS Caremark . During interviews with interested parties, it was 
suggested that CVS Retail pharm acy technicians are prompted as to which drugs to pick from a 
list to maximize the spread.  CVS Caremark representative deny that this takes place. The limited 
scope of this report does not address this practice and this area warrants a more thorough audit. 
 
Other potential sources for conflicts of interest were identified in research performed for this 
report. For example, one conflict noted involves  the PBMs exclusivity with specialty and mail 
order prescriptions. Most of the Plans agreed to have its PBM be the provider of these types of 
prescriptions. This arrangement could impact the rates of generic and brand drugs that  may 
impact the rebates paid to the PBM for  the purchase of the drugs . The potential conflicts of 
interest surrounding PBMs warrant further study as they could impact not only Ohio Medicaid 
program but other public payers of health care.  
 
• Sale of De-Identified Information: We inquired with representatives of  both PBMs as to whether 
they sell de-identified data associated with PBM facilitated transactions. They  both indicated that 
they would need permission from a Plan to do that . Based on a review of contracts between 
PBMs and the Plans, there are no provisions prohibiting the sale of de-identified data by a PBM 
to a third party.  
===PAGE 28===
Ohio’s Medicaid Managed Care Pharmacy Services 
 
 Page 21 
 
Appendix A: Analysis of Maximum Allowable Cost Lists for November 12  - 18, 2017 
We received maximum allowable cost generic drug pricing lists from OptumRx and CVS Caremark  for 
one week and analyzed the pricing for a sample of five drugs16. For this period, CVS Caremark provided 
12 lists and OptumRx provided three lists17. We identified the prices applicable to each of the five 
selected generic drugs from both PBMs. CVS Caremark had four times  the number of lists  with an 
average of two different prices for each drug during the week as compared to one different price for 
OptumRx. However, this data represents a limited snapshot of drug pricing and is not sufficient to draw 
conclusions about pricing.   
                                                      
16 The five drugs selected were: Omeprazole, Hydrocodone-Acetaminophen, Cetirizine HCL, Tramadol 
HCL, and Amoxicillin. 
17 Three additional Maximum Allowable Cost lists were provided by O ptumRx; however, they were 
excluded from this analysis as OptumRx stated the three lists were based on aggregate value based 
contract pricing and were not reflective of individual negotiated drug prices.  
 
===PAGE 29===
Ohio’s Medicaid Managed Care Pharmacy Services 
 
 Page 22 
 
Appendix B: Minimum and Maximum Spread by Quarter and Drug Type 
This data shows that specialty drugs had the largest minimum and maximum spreads per claim, followed 
by generics and then brand drugs. We reviewed some of the claims that showed a negative spread and 
found that these were due to a payment from a third party payer, indicating that the member had other 
insurance coverage.  
 
Minimum and Maximum Spread by Quarter and Drug Type  
  Brand  Generic  Specialty    
Quarter  Min. 
Spread 
Max. 
Spread  
Min. 
Spread 
Max. 
Spread  
Min. 
Spread 
Max. 
Spread  
Combined 
Average 
4/1/2017-6/30/2017 ($1.79) $3.32  ($3.22) $7.58  ($33.47) $32.45  $5.09  
7/1/2017-9/30/2017 ($1.87) $3.20  ($5.07) $7.69  ($52.94) $35.26  $5.35  
10/1/2017-12/31/2017 ($2.11) $3.05  ($5.02) $8.96  ($41.46) $37.36  $6.47  
1/1/2018-3/31/2018 ($3.84) $2.96  ($5.92) $8.39  ($87.13) $58.65  $6.01  
Total  ($2.23) $3.15  ($4.57) $8.20  ($53.87) $38.55  $5.71  
1 Source: Data files submitted by CVS Caremark and OptumRx 
2 Based on the period of April 1, 2017 through March 31, 2018 
  
===PAGE 30===
Ohio’s Medicaid Managed Care Pharmacy Services 
 
 Page 23 
 
Appendix C: Spread by County Based on Pharmacy Location 
County  Brand  Generic Specialty  All 
Types County  Brand  Generic Specialty  All 
Types 
Adams $0.99  $5.24  $37.69  $4.74  Licking $1.15  $7.20  $82.11  $6.55  
Allen $2.42  $6.55  $42.18  $6.11  Logan $2.20  $5.56  $7.75  $5.16  
Ashland $4.58  $5.44  $86.18  $5.41  Lorain $2.14  $5.62  $52.19  $5.23  
Ashtabula $2.18  $6.16  $53.95  $5.71  Lucas $1.13  $7.48  $32.79  $6.67  
Athens $1.60  $7.39  $59.45  $6.64  Madison $2.37  $6.00  $21.28  $5.58  
Auglaize $3.69  $8.32  $95.94  $7.85  Mahoning $2.54  $5.19  $36.58  $4.89  
Belmont $3.46  $7.99  $56.08  $7.50  Marion $1.00  $5.79  $46.74  $5.33  
Brown $1.48  $6.53  $95.59  $5.97  Medina $2.27  $5.92  $38.06  $5.53  
Butler $1.49  $6.08  $16.53  $5.56  Meigs $2.13  $5.45  $96.36  $5.18  
Carroll $2.05  $5.57  $171.03  $5.20  Mercer $3.08  $7.97  $58.87  $7.49  
Champaign $1.80  $6.97  $71.60  $6.42  Miami $2.51  $7.01  $45.88  $6.51  
Clark $1.55  $5.33  $45.12  $4.90  Monroe $1.53  $4.96  $50.52  $4.58  
Clermont $1.31  $7.37  $69.11  $6.65  Montgomery $1.73  $5.81  $44.68  $5.37  
Clinton $1.91  $6.78  $55.94  $6.23  Morgan ($17.80) $4.91  $301.45  $2.13  
Columbiana $3.77  $5.77  $39.20  $5.53  Morrow $1.79  $6.72  $58.99  $6.14  
Coshocton $2.10  $5.22  $39.83  $4.83  Muskingum $2.20  $6.78  $52.96  $6.21  
Crawford $1.68  $6.17  $157.17  $5.75  Noble $2.24  $6.99  $108.25  $6.54  
Cuyahoga $1.70  $5.29  $73.19  $5.08  Ottawa $2.89  $7.26  $47.64  $6.72  
Darke $2.41  $7.08  $67.82  $6.62  Paulding $3.37  $6.36  $60.14  $6.03  
Defiance $2.98  $7.14  $36.22  $6.68  Perry $1.30  $6.64  $80.11  $5.99  
Delaware $1.30  $7.91  $36.09  $7.28  Pickaway $1.10  $6.54  $65.24  $5.90  
Erie $2.31  $6.58  $82.17  $6.20  Pike $1.88  $6.05  $38.20  $5.56  
Fairfield $1.41  $6.59  $69.07  $6.01  Portage $3.77  $6.79  $46.78  $6.45  
Fayette $0.89  $6.75  $50.09  $6.07  Preble $1.75  $5.06  $60.06  $4.70  
Franklin $1.09  $6.06  $62.13  $5.57  Putnam $1.70  $7.97  $42.19  $7.34  
Fulton $1.39  $8.96  $49.46  $8.12  Richland $2.95  $6.01  $40.89  $5.66  
Gallia $2.40  $5.14  $32.65  $4.86  Ross $1.56  $5.39  $61.86  $4.99  
Geauga $2.63  $7.36  $75.19  $6.90  Sandusky $3.59  $7.87  $101.16  $7.51  
Greene $2.09  $6.38  $47.55  $5.87  Scioto $2.04  $4.89  $35.52  $4.56  
Guernsey $2.34  $6.76  $30.01  $6.28  Seneca $4.17  $8.36  $109.86  $7.96  
Hamilton $0.86  $6.06  $42.91  $5.48  Shelby $2.58  $7.34  $45.99  $6.86  
Hancock $3.40  $8.59  $30.56  $7.95  Stark $2.93  $6.10  $51.17  $5.78  
Hardin $2.16  $6.95  $37.24  $6.38  Summit $3.50  $6.10  $67.03  $5.87  
Harrison $2.85  $6.00  $114.17  $5.75  Trumbull $2.61  $5.64  $36.88  $5.29  
Henry $1.33  $9.31  $36.82  $8.03  Tuscarawas $3.22  $5.50  $46.13  $5.26  
Highland $0.98  $6.05  $34.95  $5.40  Union $1.49  $5.89  $49.92  $5.37  
Hocking $1.05  $7.72  $47.69  $6.93  VanWert $4.28  $8.90  $26.79  $8.38  
Holmes $9.41  $7.25  $80.79  $7.53  Vinton ($6.39) $4.94  $50.36  $3.44  
Huron $2.96  $6.62  $83.76  $6.26  Warren $2.26  $6.42  $13.67  $6.03  
Jackson $2.20  $6.01  $71.97  $5.56  Washington $1.95  $5.58  $72.68  $5.17  
Jefferson $2.97  $6.98  $61.01  $6.59  Wayne $2.76  $6.49  $56.76  $6.10  
Knox $1.76  $6.14  $43.51  $5.72  Williams $4.41  $7.66  $30.98  $7.29  
Lake $2.33  $6.77  $38.35  $6.30  Wood $1.33  $8.27  $62.41  $7.58  
Lawrence $1.83  $4.98  $66.67  $4.68  Wyandot $1.98  $7.59  $34.81  $6.94  
1 Source: Data files submitted by CVS Caremark and OptumRx 
2 Based on the period of April 1, 2017 through March 31, 2018 
===PAGE 31===
Ohio’s Medicaid Managed Care Pharmacy Services 
 
 Page 24 
 
Appendix D: Spread by Managed Care Plan 
 
This data shows the spread as percentage of total paid to a PBM for each of the five Medicaid managed 
care plans.  
 
Managed Care Plan Total Spread (millions) Total Paid (millions) Percentage 
Buckeye $32.8 $298 11.0% 
CareSource $113.5 $1,386 8.2% 
Molina $27.1 $310.2 8.8% 
Paramount $22.3 $244.4 9.1% 
United $28.9 $287.8 10.1% 
Total $224.8 $2,526.5 8.9% 
1 Source: Data files submitted by CVS Caremark and OptumRx 
2 Based on the period of April 1, 2017 through March 31, 2018 
===PAGE 32===
Ohio’s Medicaid Managed Care Pharmacy Services 
 
 Page 25 
 
Appendix E: Regions and Counties  
Northeast Region 
 
Ashland 
Ashtabula 
Carroll 
Columbiana 
Coshocton 
Erie 
Geauga 
Harrison 
Holmes 
Huron 
Jefferson 
Lake 
Medina 
Portage 
Trumbull 
Tuscarawas 
Wayne 
 
Southeast Region 
 
Athens 
Belmont 
Gallia 
Guernsey 
Hocking 
Jackson 
Lawrence 
Meigs 
Monroe 
Morgan 
Muskingum 
Noble 
Perry 
Scioto 
Vinton 
Washington 
Southwest Region 
 
Adams 
Brown 
Champaign 
Clark 
Clermont 
Clinton 
Darke 
Fayette 
Greene 
Highland 
Miami 
Pike 
Preble 
Ross 
Warren 
Northwest Region 
 
Auglaize 
Crawford 
Defiance 
Fulton 
Hancock 
Hardin 
Henry 
Logan 
Mercer 
Ottawa 
Paulding 
Putnam 
Sandusky 
Seneca 
Shelby 
Van Wert 
Williams 
Wood 
Wyandot 
Central Region 
 
Delaware 
Fairfield 
Knox 
Licking 
Madison 
Marion 
Morrow 
Pickaway 
Union 
Metro Region18 
 
Allen 
Butler 
Cuyahoga 
Franklin 
Hamilton 
Lorain 
Lucas 
Mahoning 
Montgomery 
Richland 
Stark 
Summit 
 
 
 
The analysis of pharmacy closures does not include the Metro Region; however these counties are 
included in a region based on their location; Allen and Lucas counties are in the Northwest Region, 
Butler, Hamilton and Montgomery counties are in the Southwes t Region, Franklin County is in the Central 
Region and the remaining Metro counties are in the Northeast Region.  
  
                                                      
18 Counties identified as metropolitan is based on categorization in the Quality Decision Support System.  
===PAGE 33===
Ohio’s Medicaid Managed Care Pharmacy Services 
 
 Page 26 
 
Appendix F: Pharmacy Closures by Region 
The following table shows a breakdown of the independent, small chain  and large chain pharmacy 
closures by region and by year as reported by the Ohio Pharmacy Board. The Pharmacy Board’s data did 
not identify reasons for a closure.  
 
Year 
 
Northeast 
 
Southeast 
 
Southwest 
 
Northwest 
 
Central 
 
Totals 
2013 15 7 17 11 5 55 
2014 15 2 15 4 7 43 
2015 9 2 6 5 4 26 
2016 52 5 21 11 23 112 
2017 19 6 15 6 19 65 
2018 23 5 19 18 5 70 
Totals 133 27 93 55 63 371 
Percentage 36% 7% 25% 15% 17% 100% 
1 Source: State of Ohio Pharmacy Board. 
2 The 2018 data includes only January through May 2018 so does not represent a full year.  
 
 