
===PAGE 1===
PERFORMANCE AUDIT REPORT 
_______________ 
 
Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 
PerformRx, LLC 
 
An Audit of the Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for 
the Physical HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
_______________ 
 
August 2024 
 
 
 

===PAGE 2===
This page left blank intentionally 
 
===PAGE 3===
 
 
August 21, 2024 
 
 
The Honorable Valerie A. Arkoosh, MD, 
MPH 
Secretary 
Pennsylvania Department of Human 
Services 
P.O. Box 2675  
Harrisburg, PA 17110-2675
Mr. Jim Gartner, MBA, R.Ph. 
President 
PerformRx, LLC 
200 Stevens Drive 
Philadelphia, PA 19113-1570 
 
Dear Secretary Arkoosh and Mr. Gartner: 
 
This report contains the results of the Department of the Auditor General’s performance audit of 
the Pennsylvania Department of Human Services (DHS) Physical HealthChoices 
(HealthChoices) Medicaid program and the pharmacy benefit manager (PBM) PerformRx, LLC 
(PerformRx). Our audit period was January 1, 2022, through December 31, 2022. This 
performance audit was conducted pursuant to Sections 402 and 403 of The Fiscal Code and 
Section 449.2 of the Human Services Code.
1  
 
We conducted this performance audit in accordance with generally accepted government 
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain 
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions 
based on our audit objectives.
2 We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis 
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. 
 
Our audit included the following three objectives:  
 
Pertaining to DHS, the audit objectives were as follows:  
 
• Determine whether DHS effectively monitored the PBMs’ pharmacy claims, including, 
but not limited to, the accuracy of the pharmacy information used to prepare the 
capitation rates for the HealthChoices Medicaid program.
 
1 See 72 P.S. §§ 402 and 403, 62 P.S. § 449.2, effective December 27, 2022 (Act 98 of 2022).  
2 U.S. Government Accountability Office. Government Auditing Standards. 2018 Revision. Technical Update April 
2021.  
===PAGE 4===
The Honorable Valerie A. Arkoosh, MD, MPH 
Mr. Jim Gartner, MBA, R.Ph. 
August 21, 2024 
Page 2 
 
 
• Determine whether DHS effectively monitored the PBMs’ contracts to ensure compliance 
and transparency for the HealthChoices Medicaid program.  
 
Pertaining to PerformRx, the audit objective was as follows: 
  
• Determine if the PBM was compliant with 62 P.S. § 449(h)(3) and (4) of the Human 
Services Code (as amended by Act 120 of 2020) regarding charges and fees paid to the 
PBM by the pharmacies, or pharmacy service organizations, as compared to the 
corresponding amounts billed to the applicable HealthChoices managed care 
organizations (MCOs) to ensure transparency, compliance, and accountability for the 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program.  
 
Our methodology to satisfy these audit objectives, along with our evaluation of management’s 
internal controls significant to these audit objectives, is included in Appendix A of this report.  
This report presents three findings and 17 recommendations.  
  
As discussed in Finding 1, we found that DHS failed to effectively monitor the HealthChoices 
program’s pharmacy expenditures of $4.6 billion in calendar year 2022. This resulted in 
undisclosed spread pricing in which PBMs were not reporting transmission fees to the MCOs 
and DHS that are charged to the pharmacies. This lack of transparency resulted in overstated 
pharmacy data. DHS declined to provide MCO financial reports, which prevented the auditors 
from determining whether the transmission fees charged by PBMs were properly accounted for 
in the MCOs’ Medical Loss Ratio (MLR) calculations or properly accounted for in setting future 
capitation rates for the HealthChoices program.
 
 
In Finding 2, we found DHS did not effectively monitor contracts between the Physical 
HealthChoices MCOs and PBMs. DHS did not have written policies and procedures for its 
contract monitoring efforts, and it did not verify that PBM contracts complied with the 
HealthChoices contract. 
 
 
In Finding 3, we found PerformRx, LLC was transparent and accountable to the pharmacies for 
transmission fees charged during pharmacy drug claims but was not adequately transparent to the 
three HealthChoices MCOs or DHS. 
 
In closing, we thank DHS and PerformRx for their cooperation and assistance during the audit. 
DHS is in general disagreement with Finding 1 and general agreement with Finding 2. See DHS’ 
Response and Auditor’s Conclusion section of this audit report. PerformRx is in general 
agreement with Finding 3. For further detail, see the PerformRx LLC’s Response and Auditor’s 
===PAGE 5===
The Honorable Valerie A. Arkoosh, MD, MPH 
Mr. Jim Gartner, MBA, R.Ph. 
August 21, 2024 
Page 3 
 
 
Conclusion section of this audit report. We reserve the right to follow up at an appropriate time 
to determine whether and to what extent our recommendations have been implemented. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
Timothy L. DeFoor 
Auditor General 
 
 

===PAGE 6===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
i 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
Executive Summary ........................................................................................................... 1 
Introduction and Background .......................................................................................... 4 
Pennsylvania Department of Human Services (DHS) 
Finding One: DHS did not effectively monitor pharmacy drug claims which 
resulted in undisclosed spread pricing, overstated pharmacy data, 
and a lack of transparency
 ........................................................................13 
Recommendations ........................23 
Finding Two: DHS did not effectively monitor contracts between the Physical 
HealthChoices managed care organizations and pharmacy benefit 
managers
 .......................................................................................................25 
Recommendations ........................28 
DHS’ Response and Auditor’s Conclusion ..........................................................................29 
PerformRx, LLC 
Finding Three: PerformRx, LLC was transparent and accountable to the 
pharmacies for transmission fees but was not transparent to the 
MCOs and DHS regarding the fees which resulted in undisclosed 
spread pricing
 ...............................................................................................46 
Recommendations ........................50 
PerformRx, LLC’s Response and Auditor’s Conclusion .................................................51 
Appendix A – Objectives, Scope, Methodology, and Data Reliability .......................................57
===PAGE 7===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
ii 
TABLE OF CONTENTS (continued) 
 
Appendix B – Definitions .............................................................................................................74 
 
Appendix C – Consultant Memo ..................................................................................................77 
 
Appendix D – MCO Subcontractor Checklist ..............................................................................82 
 
Appendix E – Medical Loss Ratio ................................................................................................88 
 
Appendix F – PerformRx Test Results for a Selection of 60 Claims From its Claims Processing 
System ....................................................................................................................90 
 
Appendix G – Distribution List ....................................................................................................93 
 
 
===PAGE 8===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
1 
Executive Summary 
 
This report presents the results of our performance audit of the Pennsylvania Department of 
Human Services (DHS) Physical HealthChoices (HealthChoices) Medicaid program regarding 
DHS’s monitoring of pharmacy claims and pharmacy benefit manager (PBM) contracts, as well 
as one of the PBMs, PerformRx, LLC’s (PerformRx) compliance with Act 120 of 2020. Our 
performance audit included the following three objectives. 
 
Pertaining to DHS, the audit objectives were as follows:  
 
• Determine whether DHS effectively monitored the PBMs’ pharmacy claims, including, 
but not limited to, the accuracy of the pharmacy information used to prepare the 
capitation rates for the HealthChoices Medicaid program.  
 
• Determine whether DHS effectively monitored the PBMs’ contracts to ensure compliance 
and transparency for the HealthChoices Medicaid program.  
 
Pertaining to PerformRx, the audit objective was as follows:  
 
• Determine if the PBM was compliant with 62 P.S. § 449(h)(3) and (4) of the Human 
Services Code (as amended by Act 120 of 2020) regarding charges and fees paid to the 
PBM by the pharmacies, or pharmacy service organizations, as compared to the 
corresponding amounts billed to the applicable HealthChoices managed care 
organizations (MCOs) to ensure transparency, compliance, and accountability for the 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program.  
 
The audit period was January 1, 2022, through December 31, 2022.  
 
Our audit results are contained in three findings with 17 recommendations. DHS is in general 
disagreement with Finding 1 and general agreement with Finding 2. See DHS’ Response and 
Auditor’s Conclusion section of this audit report. PerformRx is in general agreement with 
Finding 3’s facts but disagrees with the audit’s interpretation of the transmission fees being 
spread pricing and the audit’s implication that the transmission fees are not justifiable. For 
further detail, see PerformRx LLC’s Response and Auditor’s Conclusion section of this audit 
report. 
 
===PAGE 9===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
2 
Finding 1 – DHS did not effectively monitor pharmacy drug claims which resulted in 
undisclosed spread pricing, overstated pharmacy data, and a lack of transparency. 
 
Our audit found that DHS had an inaccurate perception that it lacked authority to audit PBMs; 
ineffectively monitored MCOs’ pharmacy data reports; and ineffectively monitored spread 
pricing due to not validating pharmacy data to source documents resulting in DHS’ unawareness 
of the existence of spread pricing. DHS therefore failed to effectively monitor the HealthChoices 
program’s pharmacy expenditures of $4.6 billion in calendar year 2022. Additionally, DHS 
declined to provide MCO financial reports preventing the auditors from determining whether the 
transmission fees charged by PBMs were properly accounted for in the MCOs’ Medical Loss 
Ratio (MLR) calculations or properly accounted for in setting future capitation rates for the 
HealthChoices program. 
 
The following deficiencies noted during the audit, if left unresolved, could put the program’s 
federal funding at risk: 
 
• DHS’ lack of written policy and procedures for its monitoring of pharmacy encounter 
data to ensure encounter data submitted to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid 
Services (CMS) is a complete and accurate representation of the services provided to the 
Medicaid members; 
• DHS’ lack of validation that encounter data provided to CMS is correct; and  
• DHS’ lack of oversight that the encounter records on PROMISe
TM were actually 
reporting the amount the PBMs paid pharmacies.  
 
We offer seven recommendations to DHS to assist in monitoring pharmacy claims and two 
recommendations to the General Assembly to amend Act 120 of 2020. 
 
Finding 2 – DHS did not effectively monitor contracts between the Physical HealthChoices 
managed care organizations and pharmacy benefit managers. 
 
DHS did not adequately monitor the contracts between MCOs and PBMs in the HealthChoices 
program. DHS does not have policies and procedures for its contract monitoring efforts, and it 
does not verify the current PBM contracts comply with the current HealthChoices contract. 
 
DHS is the Pennsylvania’s Medicaid oversight agency and has the responsibility to ensure 
compliance with the federal and state laws and its HealthChoices agreement. Reliance on the 
MCOs to monitor the program compliance is insufficient. For instance, although DHS banned 
spread pricing and implemented pass-through pricing effective January 1, 2020; by not 
===PAGE 10===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
3 
monitoring the PBMs, our audit found that seven of the eight PBMs charged pharmacies 
transmission fees which created a spread between what the MCO paid the PBM and what the 
PBM paid the pharmacy for the same drug claim. This spread pricing practice, although 
allowable by Act 120 of 2020, requires transparency and disclosure to the pharmacies during 
adjudication of a pharmacy claim. 
 
DHS’ lack of effective oversight of the MCOs’ PBM contracts provided little to no assurance 
that PBMs’ contracts or practices comply with the current HealthChoices agreements, Act 120 of 
2020, or specific state and federal regulations, potentially putting the Medicaid program at risk 
for noncompliance. 
 
We offer five recommendations to DHS to assist in monitoring PBM contracts. 
 
Finding 3 – PerformRx, LLC was transparent and accountable to the pharmacies for 
transmission fees but was not transparent to the MCOs and DHS regarding the fees which 
resulted in undisclosed spread pricing. 
 
During calendar year 2022, PerformRx was the PBM for three of the HealthChoices MCOs. Our 
performance audit determined that PerformRx was partially compliant with Act 120 of 2020 by 
providing transparency to the pharmacies regarding transmission fees during adjudication. 
However, PerformRx failed to disclose the transmission fees to the three MCOs and DHS which 
violated the transparency requirements set forth by Act 120 of 2020. To remedy the 
noncompliance found by our audit, PerformRx submitted the required information dated back to 
2019. 
 
We offer three recommendations to PerformRx for transparency and monitoring of its pharmacy 
adjustments, like reversals.  
 
 
===PAGE 11===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
4 
Introduction and Background 
 
The Department of the Auditor General (DAG) conducted this performance audit of the 
Pennsylvania Department of Human Services’ (DHS) Physical HealthChoices (HealthChoices) 
Medicaid program and PerformRx, LLC (PerformRx), a pharmacy benefit manager (PBM) 
pursuant to Sections 402 and 403 of The Fiscal Code (Code) and Section 449.2 of the Human 
Services Code.
3,4,5 
 
In 2022, the Pennsylvania General Assembly and Governor enacted Act 98 of 2022, which 
authorizes DAG to conduct audits of PBMs. Act 98 states, in part, “The Department of the 
Auditor General may conduct an audit and review of a pharmacy benefits manager that provides 
pharmacy benefits management to a medical assistance managed care organization under 
contract with the department [DHS].” 
 
Our performance audit had three audit objectives and covered the period January 1, 2022, 
through December 31, 2022. The first two audit objectives relate to DHS and the third to 
PerformRx: 
 
1. Determine whether DHS effectively monitors the PBMs’ pharmacy claims, including, but 
not limited to, the accuracy of the pharmacy information used to prepare the capitation 
rates for the HealthChoices Medicaid program. 
 
2. Determine whether DHS effectively monitors the PBMs’ contracts to ensure compliance 
and transparency for the HealthChoices Medicaid program. 
 
3. Determine if PerformRx is compliant with 62 P.S. § 449(h)(3) and (4) of the Human 
Services Code (as amended by Act 120 of 2020
6) regarding charges and fees paid to the 
PBM by the pharmacies, or pharmacy service organizations, as compared to the 
corresponding amounts billed to the applicable HealthChoices managed care 
 
3 PerformRx is a pharmacy benefit manager used by and contracted with three of the current seven HealthChoices’ 
managed care organizations also referred to as MCOs. 
4 See 72 P.S. §§ 402 and 403. 
5 See 62 P.S. § 449.2, effective December 27, 2022 (Act 98 of 2022). 
6 Pursuant to Section 3 of Act 120, effective January 25, 2021, the amendment of Section 449 “shall apply to any 
agreement or contract relating to pharmacy services to medical assistance recipients in the managed care delivery 
system entered into or amended on or after the effective date [i.e., January 25, 2021] of this  section.”  
===PAGE 12===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
5 
organizations (MCOs) to ensure transparency, compliance, and accountability for the 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program.7 
 
Appendix A of this audit report provides a detailed description of the audit objectives, scope, 
methodology, data reliability, and evaluation of management’s internal controls related to the 
audit objectives. Appendix B provides definitions for terms used throughout this audit report. 
 
In the sections that follow, we present relevant background information on DHS, HealthChoices’ 
MCOs, PBMs, PerformRx, LLC, the pharmaceutical supply chain, and the pharmacy claims 
process.  
 
 
Pennsylvania Department of Human Services (DHS)  
 
DHS oversees the Medicaid program (also called Medical Assistance) in Pennsylvania, which 
pays for health care services for eligible individuals. Medicaid is operated in Pennsylvania 
primarily as three distinct programs: 1) Physical HealthChoices, 2) Community HealthChoices, 
and 3) Behavioral HealthChoices. This audit reviewed DHS’ monitoring only within the Physical 
HealthChoices program, referred to as HealthChoices.
8  
 
DHS contracts with MCOs to administer health care for its Medicaid members. Each MCO 
participating in the HealthChoices program subcontracts with a PBM to administer some, if not 
all, of the prescription drug benefit. The MCO agreements with the PBMs are considered 
subcontracts of the MCOs and are, therefore, not directly contracted with or executed by DHS.  
 
According to DHS records, the HealthChoices pharmacy expenditures were more than $4.6 
billion of the $14.5 billion spent for the HealthChoices program in 2022. 
 
 
HealthChoices MCOs January 1, 2022, through December 31, 2022 
 
Between January 1, 2022, and December 31, 2022, the HealthChoices contract was re-procured 
with a start date of the new contract on September 1, 2022. Based on the new contract beginning 
 
7 Note that our audit procedures do not distinguish between pharmacies and pharmacy services organizations, and 
we refer to all of them as pharmacies. 
8 We also did not include the Adult Community Autism Program and the Children’s Health Insurance Program 
(known as CHIP) in our audit. 
===PAGE 13===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
6 
September 1, 2022, some of the previous MCOs added regional zones, some MCOs exited 
regional zones, and one MCO contract was not continued. 
 
The following eight MCOs were contracted for the period January 1, 2022, through August 31, 
2022:  
 
MCO9 Abbreviation 
1. Health Partners Plans, Inc. Health Partners 
2. UnitedHealthcare of Pennsylvania, Inc. UnitedHealthcare 
3. Keystone First Keystone First 
4. Highmark Wholecare (formerly Gateway Health Plan) Highmark 
5. UPMC for You, Inc. UPMC 
6. AmeriHealth Caritas Pennsylvania AmeriHealth 
7. Geisinger Health Plan Geisinger 
8. Aetna Better Health, Inc. Aetna 
 
The contract with Aetna was not continued, while the other seven MCOs were contracted for the 
new HealthChoices contract effective September 1, 2022. Below is a list of the contracted 
MCOs, by regional zone, for the two contract periods during calendar year 2022:
 
9 MCOs may use various legal entities with similar, but different, legal names for different services which is out of 
the scope for this audit. 
===PAGE 14===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
7 
January 1 – August 31, 2022 September 1 – December 31, 202210 
  
HC Southeast Zone HC Southeast Zone 
Aetna  Geisinger 
Health Partners Health Partners 
UnitedHealthcare  Keystone First 
Keystone First UnitedHealthcare   
UPMC 
  
HC Southwest Zone HC Southwest Zone 
Aetna AmeriHealth 
Highmark Geisinger 
UnitedHealthcare Health Partners 
UPMC Highmark  
UPMC 
  
HC Lehigh/Capital Zone HC Lehigh/Capital Zone 
Aetna AmeriHealth 
Highmark Geisinger 
UnitedHealthcare Health Partners 
UPMC Highmark 
AmeriHealth UPMC 
  
HC New West Zone HC Northwest Zone 
Aetna AmeriHealth 
Highmark Geisinger 
UPMC Health Partners 
AmeriHealth UPMC 
  
HC New East Zone HC Northeast Zone 
Aetna AmeriHealth 
Geisinger  Geisinger 
AmeriHealth Health Partners  
UPMC 
 
 
10 Source: PhysicalHealthChoices-Main (pa.gov), Statewide HealthChoices Physical Health Managed Care Map of 
MCOs by Zones effective September 1, 2022. See 
https://www.pa.gov/en/agencies/dhs/resources/medicaid/statewide-mco-map.html (last accessed July 1, 2024). 
===PAGE 15===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
8 
HealthChoices MCOs’ PBMs January 1, 2022, through December 31, 2022 
 
During the audit period, each HealthChoices MCO contracted with a PBM to provide various 
pharmacy benefits, including, but not limited to, the adjudication of pharmacy claims, as follows: 
 
HealthChoices MCOs PBM Vendor 
1. Geisinger  PerformRx, LLC 
2. AmeriHealth  PerformRx, LLC 
3. Keystone First PerformRx, LLC 
4. Health Partners  CaremarkPCS Health, LLC 
5. Highmark CaremarkPCS Health, LLC 
6. AetnaA  CaremarkPCS Health, LLC 
7. UPMC Express Scripts, Inc. 
8. UnitedHealthcare  OptumRx, Inc. 
A As noted in the preceding section, Aetna did not continue with the HealthChoices 
program for the new contract effective September 1, 2022.  
 
We selected a PBM as part of this audit to determine whether the selected PBM is compliant 
with Act 120 of 2020, which disallows the use of spread pricing in the Medicaid program unless 
there is adequate transparency and accountability related to a transmission fee charged by the 
PBM during the payment process to the pharmacy.
11 The PBM selected was PerformRx, LLC, 
since it serves as a PBM for three of the MCOs.  
 
 
PerformRx, LLC (PerformRx) 
 
Founded in 1999, PerformRx, a Pennsylvania limited liability company (LLC), serves as a PBM 
and provides a “boutique service model” for its clients which include MCOs.
12 It serves three 
MCOs in the HealthChoices program, as noted in the chart above: Geisinger, AmeriHealth, and 
Keystone First. AmeriHealth and Keystone First, jointly, contract with PerformRx for PBM 
 
11 Act 120 of 2020 prohibits a differential between the amount paid by the MCO to the PBM and the amount paid by 
the PBM to the pharmacy unless it is a transmission fee that is disclosed and part of the adjudication process. For 
purposes of this audit the differential is referred to as spread pricing. Therefore, we interpret the Act as prohibiting 
spread pricing unless it is for a disclosed transmission fee processed during payment to the pharmacy for the claim. 
A claim includes, but is not limited to, the drug cost, dispensing fee, and copay amount.  
12 PerformRx’s website provides the information on the “boutique service model.” Managed Care Organizations - 
PerformRx (l ast accessed  June 5, 2024). 
===PAGE 16===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
9 
services. Additionally, Geisinger contracts with PerformRx for PBM services. See PerformRx, 
LLC Finding 3 for the results of our audit of PerformRx. 
 
 
Pharmaceutical Supply Chain 
 
The following diagram illustrates the pharmaceutical supply chain and the flow of a drug from 
the manufacturer through the pharmaceutical supply chain to the Medicaid member. It also 
illustrates the flow of the monthly capitated payment from DHS to the MCO, the payment of the 
drugs and dispensing fees from the MCO to the PBM, and the payment from the PBM to the 
pharmacies for dispensed drugs.
13 
 
 
 
Source: Developed by DAG auditors based on information reviewed from several public sources, including the DHS 
website and The 2023 Economic Report on U.S. Pharmacies and Pharmacy Benefit Managers  located at 
https://drugch.nl/pharmacy. Dollars are reduced as administrative costs are taken.  
 
The PBMs develop and maintain a pharmacy provider network through contracts with 
pharmacies.14 Through those contracts, the PBMs establish the rates paid to pharmacies for drugs 
and for costs associated with dispensing those drugs to Medicaid participants. Once the claims 
 
13 The explanation and diagram are simplified for the reader. A drug claim includes, but is not limited to, the cost of 
the drug, the dispensing fee paid for dispensing the fee, less applicable copay and third -party liability. 
14 Pharmacies may join Pharmacy Services Administration Organizations (PSAOs) and the PSAO then contracts 
with the PBMs. For purposes of this audit, we will just refer to pharmacies.  

===PAGE 17===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
10 
are paid by the PBM to the pharmacy, the PBM provides the encounter information to the MCOs 
for the MCOs to report the encounter information to DHS’ Provider Reimbursement and 
Operations Management Information System, referred to as PROMISe
TM. 
 
DHS’ actuaries use the accumulation of the pharmacy encounter data, associated costs, and other 
relevant program information to calculate future capitation rates that DHS pays the MCOs to 
operate the HealthChoices program.
15 These capitation rates include the cost of the pharmacy 
benefits that are currently being subcontracted by the MCOs to the PBMs. 
 
 
Pharmacy Claims Process 
 
PerformRx and DHS described the pharmacy claims process as follows:  
 
o A Medicaid member obtains a prescription from their physician and takes that 
prescription to the pharmacy.  
o The pharmacy then begins the dispensing process by electronically submitting a claim 
through their adjudication claims processing system.  
o The system processes the claims in real time.  
o Once the pharmacy enters the claim, the system pulls in relevant information regarding 
the member and the prescription, including the benefit, the pricing, and member 
eligibility for that time period and transaction. 
 
The automated validation of the claim is real-time and the claim either passes or fails the 
validation criteria.
16 If the claim passes the validation process, the claims processing system 
returns an approval. If the claim fails, the claim is rejected.  
 
The claims processing system uses standard approval and rejection codes based on the National 
Council for Prescription Drug Programs (NCPDP). If rejected, the pharmacy is able to intervene 
and work with the member to determine if the claim can be corrected and reprocessed. If 
approved, the pharmacy fills the prescription, and the claim is then processed by the PBM. 
 
 
15 An encounter is defined in Appendix B of this audit report as any covered health care service provided to a member, 
regardless of whether the individual has an associated Claim. A pharmacy claim becomes an encounter when reported 
to the MCO in the National Council for Prescription Drug Program (NCPDP) format.  
16 We did not audit the validation criteria, such as eligibility, or the claims processing software which can be 
different between the PBMs. 
===PAGE 18===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
11 
PerformRx’s claims processing system accumulates claims twice a month and creates invoices 
for each claim to send to the MCO for a payment request. The MCO approves the payment 
request and sends the payment to the PBM. This process of the claim between the pharmacy and 
the payment request to the MCO is automated without manual intervention. 
Upon MCO approval and payment to the PBM, a remittance advice is sent to the pharmacy 
through the claims processing system. The remittance advice details the claim and includes, but 
is not limited to, the amounts being paid to the pharmacy for the drug, the dispensing fee paid to 
the pharmacy, member copays received by the pharmacy, and the transmission fees charged by 
the PBM to the pharmacy.  
 
Each claim transmitted to the MCO is then considered an encounter for the member and 
transmitted to DHS as an encounter record into PROMISe
TM.17 The accumulation of the 
encounter records then represents the encounter data used by DHS’ actuaries to set future 
capitation rates. The capitation rates are used by DHS to pay the MCOs to run the HealthChoices 
program. 
 
The following is an illustration of the above pharmacy claims process: 
 
 
 
 
Source: Developed by DAG auditors based on information received from DHS and PerformRx.  
 
 
17 Since this audit is not of the MCOs, we did not review the MCO’s process it does before sending the encounter 
records to DHS. 

===PAGE 19===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
12 
The billing practice used by PBMs called spread pricing has drawn scrutiny in Pennsylvania and 
other states.18,19 Through spread pricing, a PBM pays the pharmacy less than the MCO paid the 
PBM for the same claim.20 In this audit, we found spread pricing as a result of a transmission fee 
that the PBM charges the pharmacy per claim. The PBM keeps the fee or spread as another 
revenue source. Since January 1, 2020, DHS required the PBMs to pay the pharmacies the 
amount the MCO paid the PBM, which is called pass-through pricing. We conducted this audit 
to determine if DHS adequately monitors HealthChoices pharmacy claims and PBM contracts to 
ensure the PBMs are practicing pass-through pricing or alternatively, spread pricing, and whether 
it complied with Act 120 of 2020 requirements for transparency and accountability.  
 
 
 
 
18 See also, Act 77 of 2024, July 17, 2024. 
19 Other states include, but are not limited to, Ohio, Kentucky, Illinois, and Arkansas, listed in a letter dated March 
1, 2023 from the Congress of the United States to the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS ), *Letter-to-
CMS.pdf (house.gov) (l ast accessed July 8, 2024 ). 
20 CMS Issues New Guidance Addressing Spread Pricing in Medicaid, Ensures Pharmacy Benefit Managers are not 
Up-Charging Taxpayers | CMS. C MS defines spread pricing  in this press release as: Spread pricing occurs when 
health plans contract with pharmacy benefit managers (PBMs) to manage their prescription drug benefits, and PBMs 
keep a portion of the amount paid to them by the health plans for prescription drugs instead of passing the full 
payments on to pharmacies. Thus, there is a spread between the amount that the health plan pays the PBM and the 
amount that the PBM reimburses the pharmacy for a beneficiary’s prescription (l ast accessed July 16, 2024). 
===PAGE 20===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
13 
DHS Finding 1 – DHS did not effectively monitor pharmacy drug claims 
which resulted in undisclosed spread pricing, overstated pharmacy data, and 
a lack of transparency. 
 
The Pennsylvania Department of Human Services (DHS) failed to effectively monitor the 
Physical HealthChoices (HealthChoices) program’s pharmacy expenditures of $4.6 billion in 
calendar year 2022.
21 The following sections in this finding describe: 
 
• DHS’ inaccurate perception that it lacks authority to audit PBMs. 
• DHS’ ineffective monitoring of MCOs’ reports on pharmacy data. 
• DHS’ ineffective monitoring and lack of validating pharmacy data to source documents 
resulted in DHS’ lack of awareness of spread pricing. 
• DHS declined to provide MCO financial reports to allow the auditors to determine 
whether the transmission fees were properly accounted for in the MCO Medical Loss 
Ratio (MLR) calculations and for future capitation rates. 
 
Without effective monitoring of pharmacy data by DHS, PBMs can practice spread pricing 
without DHS’ knowledge, and MLR and capitation rate calculations may be inaccurate. By not 
adequately monitoring PBMs, DHS could put Medicaid HealthChoices program funds at risk.  
 
 
DHS’ inaccurate perception that it lacks authority to audit PBMs 
 
DHS management stated it has no authority to monitor or conduct audits or reviews of PBMs, 
and it has no process for auditing PBMs. DHS stated that the state regulations apply to Medicaid 
providers and a PBM is not a Medicaid provider of services to Medicaid members. We, however, 
disagree in that DHS has clear authority granted by the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), 
Pennsylvania Act 120 of 2020,
22 and the HealthChoices contracts and subcontracts to audit 
PBMs as follows:
 
21 References to HealthChoices throughout this audit is referring only to the Physical HealthChoices program.  
22 Amendment to the state Human Services Code (Code), effective January 25, 2021. Please note that pursuant to 
Section 3 of Act 120 of 2020, the amendment of Section 449 of the Code “shall apply to any agreement or contract 
relating to pharmacy services to medical assistance recipients in the managed care delivery system entered into or 
amended on or after the effective date [i.e., January 25, 2021] of this section.” See 62 P.S. § 449. 
===PAGE 21===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
14 
 Title 42 of the CFR requires: 
 
o Subcontractors to agree that DHS has the right to audit and make their records 
available for audit.23 
o States to review and validate encounter data and that states have procedures and 
quality assurance protocols sufficient to ensure submitted encounter data is a 
complete and accurate representation of the services provided to the Medicaid 
members.
24 
o States to ensure encounter data for Medicaid members is validated for accuracy 
and completeness before submitting the data to the Centers for Medicare & 
Medicaid Services (CMS).
25 
 
 Pennsylvania Act 120 of 2020 provides that DHS may conduct an audit or review of the 
PBMs to ensure compliance with the law and related contracts; that the PBMs shall 
maintain records of pharmacy services eligible for payment by Medicaid; and that the 
PBMs shall disclose the information to DHS upon request.
26 
 
 HealthChoices contracts between DHS and the MCOs, and each subcontract between the 
MCOs and the PBMs, contain the required provisions that allow DHS to audit records 
pertaining to HealthChoices Medicaid pharmacy expenditures. 
 
Due to DHS’ perceived lack of authority, it did not effectively monitor pharmacy encounter 
records in PROMISe
TM to ensure the encounter information agrees with pharmacy claims, MCO 
payments for the claims, and the corresponding PBM payments to the pharmacies. 
 
 
DHS’ ineffective monitoring of MCOs’ reports on pharmacy data 
 
Although DHS did not provide written policy and procedures for its monitoring and did not 
validate individual pharmacy encounter records to ensure the MCOs and PBMs are reporting the 
amount actually paid to the pharmacies by reviewing source documentation, such as payment 
remittance advices, we found for calendar year 2022 DHS did monitor aggregate pharmacy 
encounter data in PROMISeTM and MCO reports, as follows:  
 
23 42 CFR 438.230(c)(3)(i) and (ii). 
24 42 CFR 438.242(d). 
25 42 CFR 438.818(a)(2). 
26 62 P.S. § 449(b)(1)-(2), (d). 
===PAGE 22===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
15 
• Annually, DHS staff reviewed MCO policies and procedures related to the HealthChoices 
pharmacy benefits and how the MCOs are to monitor the PBMs and pharmacies. This 
type of monitoring, however, does not ensure the actual practices of the PBMs are in 
accordance with the requirements in the HealthChoices agreement. 
 
• Quarterly, DHS staff reviewed monthly MCO-prepared accuracy reports that demonstrate 
that at least 90% of the MCO’s encounter records in total for the quarter were accepted 
into PROMISe
TM by zone.27 DHS takes no action if the MCO reports that the total 
encounters for the past quarter meet the benchmark of 90% or more. If the benchmark is 
not met, DHS contacts the MCO to discuss causes and remediation efforts. We reviewed 
the accuracy reports for calendar year 2022 and noted three MCOs reported less than 
90% of the encounters were accepted by PROMISe
TM for at least one quarter. For one of 
the three MCOs, the report had no comments of follow-up with the MCO. According to 
DHS, the MCO had an incorrect identification number resulting in rejected encounters, 
and that DHS typically applies corrective action when the MCO is not meeting the 
requirement for two consecutive quarters. 
 
• Quarterly, DHS staff reviewed monthly MCO-prepared timeliness reports that 
demonstrate that at least 90% of the MCO’s encounter records in total are within the 
timeliness requirements of the HealthChoices agreement.
28 If the MCO reports that the 
total encounters for the past quarter meet the benchmark of 90%, DHS takes no action. If 
the benchmark is not met, DHS contacts the MCO to discuss remediation efforts. We 
reviewed the timeliness reports for calendar year 2022 and noted four MCOs reported 
less than 90% of the encounters met the timeliness requirements in at least one quarter. 
Each MCOs’ reports notated follow-up by DHS. 
 
• Quarterly, DHS staff reviewed monthly MCO-prepared supplemental reports that 
compare the total number of supplemental records submitted by the MCO to the total 
number of encounter records in PROMISe
TM. These records must also meet a benchmark 
of 90% or more in total for the quarter. If the benchmark is not met, DHS contacts the 
MCO to discuss remediation efforts. We reviewed the supplemental reports for calendar 
 
27 Accepted into PROMISeTM means the encounter record met the requirements of the fields needed for the system 
to accept the encounter record from the MCO’s system. 
28 Timeliness requirements in the HealthChoices agreement for processing drug claims includes processing 90% of 
clean claims within thirty days of receipt by the MCO or its subcontractor; 100% of clean claims within forty- five 
(45) days; and 100% of all claims within ninety (90) days. A “clean” claim is defined as a claim that can be 
processed without additional information needed from the provider or from a third party.  
===PAGE 23===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
16 
year 2022 and noted two MCOs fell below the 90% threshold for at least one quarter, and 
both MCOs’ reports contained notations on DHS’ follow-up. 
 
• DHS staff reviewed MCO-prepared Lag Reports for Pharmacy Payments, referred to 
herein as Report 4C. This report is a quarterly report and is used, among other things, to 
indicate if there is a difference between the total amount the MCO paid the PBM and the 
total amount the PBMs paid the pharmacy. DHS stated that all the quarterly reports for 
the MCOs reported zero as the differential for calendar year 2022, indicating that each of 
the PBMs are practicing pass-through pricing. We confirmed that all the reports were 
reporting zero as a differential; however, our review of pharmacy claims and encounter 
records from PROMISe
TM described in the next section of this finding found 
contradictory information for all but one MCO. 
 
• DHS staff reviewed MCO-prepared Outpatient Drug Pricing Transparency (Part D) 
reports, referred to herein as Transparency Reports. DHS relies on this report prepared by 
the MCOs to determine whether the MCO’s PBM is charging pharmacies fees by 
reporting the pharmacies fees (the spread) in total by month. However, DHS’ lack of 
adequate review of the data reported by the MCOs is problematic in that we found the 
Transparency Reports for calendar year 2022 to be incomplete (missing information), 
inconsistent (MCOs did not complete the reports like other MCOs), inaccurate (MCOs 
reported pharmacy fees as PBM paid fees), and misleading (MCOs reports made it appear 
as though the PBMs were practicing pass-through pricing, when in fact, they were 
practicing spread pricing). DHS indicated that the Transparency Reports are for 
informational purposes only. DHS, however, should consider this report an important tool 
to monitor the MCOs and PBMs administrative fees for rate setting, MLR calculations, 
and Act 120 of 2020 compliance. 
 
• DHS contracted with a vendor to conduct a mandatory triennial audit of pharmacy data; 
however, DHS opted out of having the vendor validate information to source 
documentation at the PBMs and pharmacies.
29 
 
• DHS contracted with an external quality review organization (EQRO) to conduct the 
mandated annual external quality review (EQR) statewide and for each MCO.
30 
 
29 42 CFR 438.602(e). At a minimum, a triennial audit of encounter and financial data must be performed. However, 
CMS does not require validation of the encounter records to source documentation;  it is merely considered optional. 
30 42 CFR 438.364.  
===PAGE 24===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
17 
However, DHS was unable to confirm whether the EQRO conducted validation of 
pharmacy claims to source documentation. 
 
• DHS reviewed other various financial reports from the MCOs. DHS would not provide us 
with copies of the reports which would have allowed us to determine what data would be 
used by the actuaries for future capitation rate setting and MLR purposes. DHS stated the 
reports were considered proprietary in nature. See the last section in this finding. 
 
Although DHS is conducting the above aggregate monitoring, DHS failed to ensure the 
pharmacy encounter records in PROMISE
TM represent the actual amounts paid by the PBM to 
the pharmacy. This is evidenced by our test work of 60 claims selected from PerformRx, LLC’s 
(PerformRx) claims processing system and 40 encounter records selected from PROMISe
TM as 
described in the next section.31   
 
 
DHS’ ineffective monitoring and lack of validating pharmacy encounter data 
to source documents resulted in DHS’ lack of awareness of spread pricing  
 
Although DHS management stated that since January 2020, the PBMs were practicing pass-
through pricing and the Transparency Reports and Report 4Cs reported PBMs are practicing 
pass-through pricing as we describe in the prior section, DHS did not actually verify this pass-
through pricing through effective monitoring practices.  
 
Since the Transparency report and Report 4C are the only reporting mechanisms for MCOs to 
report PBM fees required by Act 120 of 2020,
32 DHS should reevaluate the importance of the 
reports and its monitoring of the PBMs actual practices. 
 
 
31 The three MCOs tested for the claims were AmeriHealth, Keystone First, and Geisinger. The four MCOs tested 
for the 40 encounter records were UPMC, United Healthcare, Health Partners Plan, and Gateway. We did not test 
Aetna encounter records since there were no encounters for Aetna in October 2022 since it was no longer an M CO 
for HealthChoices effective September 1, 2022. 
32 Section 449(j) of the Code provides, in part: “(j) A managed care organization utilizing a pharmacy benefit 
manager shall report to the department [DHS] information related to each outpatient drug encounter, including the 
following: (1) The amount paid to the pharmacy benefit manager by the managed care organization. (2) The amount 
paid by the pharmacy benefit manager to the pharmacy. (3) Any differences between the amount paid in paragraph 
(1) and the amount paid in paragraph (2).” See 62 P.S. § 449(j)(1)-(3).  
 
===PAGE 25===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
18 
To confirm whether the MCOs’ PBMs were or were not practicing pass-through pricing versus 
spread pricing, we selected 60 claims from PerformRx’s claims processing system and 40 
encounter records from PROMISeTM.33 The following provides a summary of our selection 
methodology: 
 
1. PerformRx’s drug claims processed in calendar year 2022 totaled 34,346,412 claims for 
its three MCOs, and a total of $1.8 billion was paid to the pharmacies for those claims.
34 
We selected 20 claims per MCO for a total of 60 claims to review. Each group of 20 
claims included haphazardly selecting a claim per month and judgmentally selecting 
eight claims based on other criteria such as a claim that appeared to be an adjustment. 
The 60 claims were from 18 different corporate pharmacies. 
 
2. PROMISe
TM encounter records processed in October 2022 for the four MCOs that did 
not use PerformRx as a PBM were 1.5 million pharmacy encounter records totaling 
nearly $208 million. We haphazardly selected 10 encounter records for each of these four 
MCOs for a total of 40 encounters. We selected these 40 encounter records based on the 
same 18 corporate pharmacies as selected for the 60 selected claims processed by 
PerformRx as noted above.  
 
The selection above provided claims or encounters for the seven MCOs for each of the 18 
corporate pharmacies to conduct confirmations with the pharmacies, as explained further below 
in this finding. 
  
For the 60 claims and 40 encounters, we had DHS, the MCO, or PBM provide the following 
supporting documentation:  
 
• Claim transaction detail from the PBM’s claims processing system for the selected claim 
or encounter, and any prior or subsequent information associated with that encounter or 
claim; 
• Pharmacy contract payment provisions; 
• Documentation of MCO payments to the PBM for the claims; 
• Remittance advices from the PBM to the pharmacies for the claims; and 
• PROMISe
TM encounter records and related supplemental files. 
 
33 Based on the HealthChoices contract effective September 1, 2022, we selected October 2022 encounter records 
which therefore, left Aetna out of the testing since it was no longer an MCO.  
34 See Appendix A for details regarding assessment of data reliability.  
===PAGE 26===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
19 
The following chart illustrates our testing results for attributes discussed below the chart: 
  
Number of 
Claims or 
Encounters 
SelectedA 
Encounter 
Record 
Agreed to 
Pharmacy 
Paid 
AmountB 
Pass-
Through 
PricingC 
Fees & 
Spread 
PricingD 
Transparent 
to 
PharmaciesE 
Transparent 
to DHS 
Report 4CF 
Transparent 
to DHS 
Report 6DG 
MCO 1 20 3 No Yes Yes No No 
MCO 2 20 0 No Yes Yes No No 
MCO 3 20 1 No Yes Yes No No 
MCO 4 10 0 No Yes No No No 
MCO 5 10 0 No Yes No No No 
MCO 6 10 0 No Yes No No Yes 
MCO 7 10 10 Yes No N/A N/A N/A 
Total 100 14 1 6 3 0 1 
A We selected 60 claims and 40 encounter records to ensure we were tracing information from the front-end of the claims process 
to the encounter record, and vice versa. The claims process is explained in the Introduction and Background section of this 
report. 
B The encounter record in PROMISeTM and the Pharmacy paid amount from the PBM remittance advice paid amount agreed.  
C The MCO’s PBM practiced pass-through pricing by paying the pharmacy the amount the MCO paid the PBM for the drug 
claim.  
D The MCO’s PBM charged a fee, creating a difference between the amount the MCO paid the PBM and the PBM paid the 
pharmacy. 
E At least one pharmacy confirmed the amount it was paid was less than the amount on the PROMISe TM record due to a fee 
charged by the PBM, indicating transparency regarding the PBM’s fee. 
F The Report 4C listed transmission fees if the MCO’s PBM was charging the pharmacies a fee.  
G The Transparency Report accurately reflected the MCO’s PBM was charging pharmacies a fee per drug claim.  
N/A Not applicable since pass-through pricing was practiced. 
Source: Developed by DAG auditors based on information received from DHS, MCOs, and PBMs.  For data reliability, we 
traced the DHS PROMISeTM encounter records to claims data from pharmacies and payment remittances from the PBM to 
the pharmacies to determine if the PBM was charging a transmission fee and to determine whether the amount listed on 
the DHS PROMISeTM encounter record was reduced by the transmission fee. Other than the three MCOs that use 
PerformRx, we did not perform procedures to assess the completeness of the invoices and payment remittances ; therefore, 
we considered the data from the other four MCOs and their PBMs of undetermined reliability as noted in Appendix A. 
Although this determination may affect the precision of the numbers we present, there is sufficient evidence in total to 
support our findings and conclusions.
 
 
Our test work found that only one MCO’s PBM actually practiced pass-through pricing, while 
the other six MCOs’ PBMs were charging fees, and therefore, NOT practicing pass-through 
===PAGE 27===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
20 
pricing in calendar year 2022. Although a differential, known as spread pricing, is not permitted 
by Act 120 of 2020, if the PBM charges a fee creating a spread, it must be disclosed and assessed 
during adjudication of the claim.35  
 
To determine if the PBMs charging fees were transparent with the pharmacies regarding the fees, 
we sent confirmations to the 18 corporate pharmacies for the 100 claims and encounters based on 
the amount listed as paid in PROMISe
TM. The confirmation letter for each pharmacy requested 
that the pharmacy verify whether the DHS encounter record amounts recorded in PROMISeTM 
were the amounts actually received by the pharmacy. Six of the 18 pharmacies confirmed that 
there were encounter record amounts that were incorrect due to a fee charged by three MCOs’ 
PBM. This provided evidence that the PBM for those MCOs was transparent to the pharmacies 
since the pharmacies were aware of the fees.  
 
Since none of the 18 pharmacies indicated any of the other four MCOs’ PBMs were charging a 
fee, we reviewed these MCOs PBMs’ payment remittances and noted that the fees, if assessed, 
were either listed line-by-line but not reduced on each line, reducing the payment total at the end; 
or were not listed until the end of the remittance in total and were offset at the end of the 
payment remittance. Since none of the 18 pharmacies acknowledged that a transmission fee 
reduced its payment amount paid by the other three MCOs’ PBMs that charged fees, we 
concluded these three MCOs’ PBMs were not adequately transparent to the pharmacies as 
required by Act 120 of 2020. 
 
We also found that not only was the amount in PROMISe
TM overstated for each encounter record 
by the amount of the fees charged by the PBMs to the pharmacies, but for one claim which was 
subsequently voided by the PBM, the claim still appeared paid in PROMISe
TM, overstating the 
encounter record. According to the PBM, the void was rejected by PROMISeTM and not 
resubmitted. This is problematic because: 1) the encounter record was not detected by the MCO 
or DHS, 2) the claim adjustment should have been resubmitted by the PBM and MCO to offset 
the amount listed in PROMISeTM but was not, and 3) it overstated the encounter data in calendar 
year 2022. 
 
 
 
35 Act 120 of 2020 does not define or call the differential between the MCO and PBM payments as spread pricing. 
We interpret that the prohibition of a differential is prohibiting spread pricing, unless the differential causing the 
spread pricing is a transmission fee that is disclosed and processed during adjudication.  
===PAGE 28===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
21 
DHS declined to provide MCO financial reports to allow the auditors to 
determine whether the transmission fees were properly accounted for in the 
MCO Medical Loss Ratio calculations and for future capitation rates  
 
In 2019, CMS published new guidance on spread pricing in Medicaid to ensure the PBMs were 
not up-charging taxpayers by inflating encounter pharmacy data, which would lead to inflated 
capitation rates in future years.
36 CMS explicitly states that all PBM revenue needs to be 
accounted for to accurately calculate the MCO’s MLR.37 The importance of the MLR is that the 
MCOs are to spend at least 85% of its capitated payments on medical care, and no more than 
15% on administrative costs and profits.
38 CMS states that: 
 
In calculating and reporting the MLR, states are responsible for ensuring that managed 
care plans are complying with these MLR requirements and should be routinely 
auditing reported data and MLR calculations to ensure that revenues, expenditures, and 
other amounts are appropriately identified and classified within each managed care plan’s 
MLR; that is, distinguishing which amounts were actually paid for benefits, or activities 
that improve health care quality, and which amounts were actually paid for 
administrative services, taxes, or other activities.
39 (Emphasis added.) 
 
Since we identified that MCOs were practicing spread pricing by charging transmission fees, we 
requested the financial reports that would be used by DHS actuaries to calculate future capitation 
rates and which were used by MCOs for MLR calculations. DHS declined to provide the auditors 
with these financial reports due to the proprietary nature of the information. We were therefore 
unable to conclude if the MLR calculations were accurate and we were unable to conclude if the 
data provided to the actuaries for future capitation rate setting were correct. We did however, 
meet with the actuary team who confirmed that it used encounter data and financial reports 
provided by DHS. Based on our audit results, it is likely that the MLR for the MCOs that did not 
report the transmission fees on the transparency reports and Report 4C were inaccurate and the 
encounter data used for the future capitation rates was overstated by the $7 million in 
administrative costs the pharmacies paid the PBMs. 
 
36 CIB: Medical Loss Ratio (MLR) Requirements Related to Third-Party Vendors (medicaid.gov) and CMS Issues 
New Guidance Addressing Spread Pricing in Medicaid, Ensures Pharmacy Benefit Managers are not Up- Charging 
Taxpayers | CMS ( last accessed June 28, 2024).  
37 Id. 
38 See Appendix E for an explanation of the MLR. 
39 CIB: Medical Loss Ratio (MLR) Requirements Related to Third-Party Vendors (medicaid.gov) (last accessed 
June 28, 2024). 
===PAGE 29===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
22 
In summary, DHS failed to effectively monitor the HealthChoices program’s pharmacy 
expenditures of $4.6 billion in calendar year 2022, which resulted in the following: 
 
• DHS’ lack of awareness that the PBMs assessed pharmacies transmission fees;  
• PBMs practiced spread pricing rather than pass-through pricing;  
• PBMs’ non-compliance with Act 120 of 2020;  
• Report 4Cs and Transparency Reports were inaccurate; and  
• Pharmacy encounter data was overstated, which affects the pharmacy data used for the 
capitation rates and potentially the MCOs’ Medical Loss Ratio.  
 
Additionally, the following deficiencies noted during the audit, if left unresolved, could put the 
program’s federal funding at risk: 
 
• DHS’ lack of written policy and procedures for its monitoring of pharmacy encounter 
data to ensure encounter data submitted to CMS is a complete and accurate 
representation of the services provided to the Medicaid members as required by CFR 
438.242(d); 
• DHS’ lack of validation that encounter data provided to CMS is correct; and  
• DHS’ lack of assurance that the encounter records on PROMISe
TM were actually 
reporting the amount the PBMs paid pharmacies.  
 
If CMS would decide to penalize DHS for its ineffective monitoring, the financial consequences 
could be dire. The funds the federal government provides to the state are based on the state’s 
Federal Medicaid Assistance Percentage (FMAP). The FMAP is a specified percentage of 
program expenditures paid by the federal government to partially fund a state’s Medicaid 
program.
40 Since Pennsylvania receives an FMAP percentage of over 50%, by DHS not 
effectively monitoring, more than half of the $4.6 billion, or $2.3 billion, could be potentially at 
risk in Medicaid pharmacy outpatient drug expenditures as based upon calendar year 2022 
numbers.  
 
 
 
40 Financial Management | Medicaid (last accessed June 11, 2024). 
===PAGE 30===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
23 
Recommendations for DHS Finding 1 
 
We recommend that DHS: 
 
1. Develop written policy and procedures for its monitoring of pharmacy encounter data to 
ensure encounter data submitted to CMS is a complete and accurate representation of the 
services provided to the Medicaid members. 
  
2. Not only focus on the aggregate performance of accuracy and timeliness benchmarks, but 
also on whether individual claims processed by each MCO’s PBM are accurate based on 
prescription, pharmacy remittance advices, and any related adjustment documentation. 
 
3. Design a system of review to audit pharmacy encounter data, on a sample basis, by 
tracing the encounter data to pharmacy remittance advices for adjudicated claims. 
Additionally, DHS should audit, on a sample basis, claims from pharmacies and payment 
remittances to pharmacies, including any adjusted claims, to ensure the final disposition 
on PROMISe
TM is accurate. 
 
4. Add pharmacy encounter validation to supporting documentation in the scope of the 
triennial audit that is currently underway. 
 
5. Reconsider the importance of the Transparency Reports for rate setting, MLR reporting, 
and Act 120 of 2020 compliance. If DHS believes the transmission fees are not an 
administrative cost that should be considered for rate setting and MLR reporting, then 
DHS should contact CMS for further guidance. 
 
6. Re-evaluate the network of PBMs contracted with MCOs to determine if pharmacy 
claims processing and monitoring of PBM practices could be achieved more effectively, 
such as contracting with one PBM for use by all the MCOs. 
 
7. Work with its actuary team to ensure that the transmission fees were adequately 
accounted for in the encounter data, MLR calculations, and capitation rates. 
 
We recommend that the General Assembly:  
  
1. Further amend the Code (i.e., Act 120 of 2020) by ensuring that there are clear 
distinctions between the terms “spread pricing”, “pass-through pricing”, and 
===PAGE 31===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
24 
“pharmacy transmission fees” by adding concise and understandable definitions of all 
three terms. 
 
2. Further amend the Code (i.e., Act 120 of 2020) to make certain that DHS is fully aware 
of all of its obligations and powers pertaining to PBMs including its monitoring duties 
under the law and related contracts.  
 
 
===PAGE 32===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
25 
DHS Finding 2 – DHS did not effectively monitor contracts between the 
Physical HealthChoices managed care organizations and pharmacy benefit 
managers. 
 
Our audit found that the Pennsylvania Department of Human Services (DHS) did not adequately 
monitor the contracts between managed care organizations (MCOs) and Pharmacy Benefit 
Managers (PBMs) in the Physical HealthChoices (HealthChoices) program. DHS does not have 
policies and procedures for its contract monitoring efforts, and it does not verify the current PBM 
contracts comply with the current HealthChoices contract. 
 
According to federal regulations, the state must have a monitoring system in place to monitor the 
MCOs and PBMs and has the right to conduct audits of both the MCOs and PBMs.
41,42 Although 
DHS shifts some of its monitoring duties onto the MCOs, the state is still required to maintain an 
effective monitoring system of the HealthChoices program, otherwise, the federal regulations, as 
well as Pennsylvania Act 120 of 2020
43, would not have required the MCOs and subcontractor, 
like a PBM, to make their records available for audit. Additionally, due to the corporate structure 
of some of the MCOs using subsidiary companies as the PBM, there is an inherent incentive for 
the MCOs to not report non-compliance of the PBMs and ensure their profitability. Therefore, 
DHS has an obligation to evaluate full regulatory compliance through effective and up-to-date 
oversight of subcontractors, such as PBMs, to ensure the integrity of the program is not 
compromised.  
 
As Pennsylvania’s Medicaid oversight agency, DHS ultimately has the responsibility to ensure 
compliance with the HealthChoices agreement. Based on the numerous national issues that have 
been of concern in recent years, DHS recognized that there was spread pricing and then banned it 
effective January 1, 2020; however, by not monitoring the PBMs, seven of the eight PBMs 
continued with spread pricing practices.
44 
 
 
41 42 CFR 438.602(a). 
42 42 CFR 438.230(c)(3)(i) and (ii). 
43 Amending the state Human Services Code (Code), effective January 25, 2021.  See 62 P.S. § 449(b). 
44 Spread pricing is a differential between what the MCO paid the PBM and what the PBM paid the pharmacy for a 
drug claim according to CMS in its 2019 guidance at CMS Issues New Guidance Addressing Spread Pricing in 
Medicaid, Ensures Pharmacy Benefit Managers are not Up-Charging Taxpayers | CMS ( last accessed June 28, 
2024). In this case, the PBM is charging the pharmacy a transmission fee that reduces the PBMs payment to the 
pharmacy for each drug claim.  
===PAGE 33===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
26 
Although DHS did not provide policies and procedures for its monitoring efforts of the MCO 
and PBM contracts, it did provide the following: 
 
• DHS required the MCOs to submit policies and procedures for how the MCO will conduct 
business and how the MCO will monitor its subcontractors.45 DHS management indicated 
that it relies on the MCOs to monitor their own subcontractors, like PBMs. DHS’ reliance on 
the MCOs, however, is not a sufficient monitoring system to evaluate whether the practices 
are actually being conducted and that the PBMs are actually compliant with the 
HealthChoices agreement’s requirements. DHS should be verifying the MCOs are actually 
monitoring the PBMs, and DHS should be doing its own monitoring of PBMs to ensure 
compliance with the HealthChoices agreement. 
 
• DHS required the MCOs to complete an Annual Subcontractor Identification report. We 
obtained each MCOs’ annual report for calendar year 2022. While MCOs list their respective 
PBM as an approved subcontractor, the list does not ensure the PBMs are actually compliant 
with applicable provisions of the HealthChoices agreement or transparent with regard to 
PBMs’ practices of fee assessment and spread pricing. 
 
• DHS required the MCOs to complete a DHS checklist to ensure the MCOs’ subcontract with 
its PBM addresses specific requirements in the HealthChoices agreement.
46 To verify the 
checklist was completed, we requested the checklists for the requirements in the September 
1, 2022, HealthChoices agreement. DHS provided a blank checklist it had created dated 
November 2023. The blank checklist did provide 28 provisions required by the September 1, 
2022, HealthChoices agreement; however, DHS did not have the MCOs complete the 
updated checklists for the six PBM agreements in place for the September 1, 2022 
agreement. Instead, DHS provided outdated checklists from the MCOs. DHS explained the 
reason the checklists were not completed for the September 1, 2022, agreement was that:   
 
… Subcontractor checklists are completed when the subcontract is first entered into. If 
the subcontractor does not change, a new checklist is not completed, and the previous 
checklist remains valid. There is no subcontractor checklist available for UPMC’s 
subcontract with its PBM, Express Scripts, because they have been contracted with that 
entity since 2006. In 2006, completion of subcontractor checklists was not a program 
 
45 DHS provided the Prior Authorization Review Panel (PARP) Resource Guide for evidence of the monitoring 
policies and procedures submitted by the MCOs. 
46 See Appendix D for the 28 requirements listed for MCO contracts with PBMs based on the September 1, 2022 
HealthChoices agreement. However, none of the checklists provided by DHS were for the September 1, 2022 new 
HealthChoices agreement. 
===PAGE 34===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
27 
requirement or process that was in place. For the same reason, there is no subcontractor 
checklist available for [the AmeriHealth and Keystone First] subcontract with PerformRx 
executed in 2011. 
 
Many of the amendments that DHS receives are due to extensions of the original contract 
with limited content change outside of the dates of coverage and same terms/conditions 
apply. In those instances, a Subcontractor Checklist is not necessary. A new 
subcontractor checklist is done on a case-by-case basis dependent upon the nature of the 
amendment. Staff with appropriate subject matter expertise review the contracts for 
compliance with HealthChoices Agreement requirements. 
 
Further, our review of the outdated checklists found that the checklists had no markings to 
evidence review by DHS. The checklists had no dates within the document to ascertain which 
HealthChoices agreement was used by DHS to create the checklist or which HealthChoices 
agreement was used by the MCO to complete the checklist. We additionally found that the 
checklists were not applicable to the PBM contracts or HealthChoices agreements in place for 
calendar year 2022.
47 We attempted to confirm the checklists against the PBM contracts but 
found that provisions of both the HealthChoices agreement and the PBM contracts were not 
aligned. By DHS not requiring the MCOs to complete a new checklist for a new or updated 
HealthChoices agreements and for new or updated PBM contracts, DHS does not have assurance 
that current PBM contracts comply with the current HealthChoices agreement. 
 
DHS’ lack of effective oversight of the MCOs’ PBM contracts and lack of documentation to 
support monitoring past an initial contract with a PBM provides little to no assurance that PBMs’ 
contracts or practices comply with the current HealthChoices agreements, Act 120 of 2020, or 
specific regulations, potentially putting the Medicaid program at risk for noncompliance. For 
instance, had DHS ensured the PBM agreements were actually updated as of January 1, 2020 to 
ensure the PBMs are actually practicing pass-through pricing, there would be no spread pricing 
or if there was, DHS would have been aware of it. Additionally, the lack of verification that the 
PBMs are not including gag clauses in the pharmacy’s contract does not ensure compliance with 
the federal prohibition on such clauses.  
 
47 For calendar year 2022, there were initially eight MCOs and seven PBM contracts; however, one MCO and PBM 
contract was not renewed for the September 1, 2022 HealthChoices contract.  
===PAGE 35===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
28 
Recommendations for DHS Finding 2 
 
We recommend that DHS:  
 
1. Utilize its statutory authority to monitor PBMs’ practices to ensure compliance with the 
HealthChoices agreement. 
 
2. Implement written policies and procedures for its monitoring of PBM contracts to ensure 
monitoring efforts are documented for the HealthChoices program.  
 
3. Monitor the contract language between MCOs and PBMs, document the review; and put 
into place enforcement mechanisms to address any non-compliance.  
 
4. Require MCOs to update the PBM contracts for compliance with the HealthChoices 
agreement and current laws, such as the Code, as amended by Act 120 of 2020.  
 
5. Ensure the current HealthChoices provisions are within the subcontractors’ contracts by 
requiring the MCOs to complete the DHS checklist (Appendix D) for each new or 
updated HealthChoices agreement, and for each new or updated PBM contract. 
 
 
===PAGE 36===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
29 
Pennsylvania Department of Human Services’ Response and Auditor’s 
Conclusion 
 
We provided copies of our draft audit findings and related recommendations to the Pennsylvania 
Department of Human Services (DHS) for its review. On the pages that follow, we included 
DHS’ response in its entirety. Following the agency’s response is our auditor’s conclusion. 
 
===PAGE 37===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
30 
Audit Response from the Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 
 

===PAGE 38===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
31 
 

===PAGE 39===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
32 
 

===PAGE 40===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
33 
 

===PAGE 41===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
34 
 

===PAGE 42===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
35 
 

===PAGE 43===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
36 
 

===PAGE 44===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
37 
 
 

===PAGE 45===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
38 
Auditor’s Conclusion to the Pennsylvania Department of Human Services’ 
Response 
 
The Pennsylvania Department of Human Services (DHS) management generally disagreed with 
the overall context of the audit report, because the Department of the Auditor General (DAG) 
classified the act of the pharmacy benefit managers (PBMs) charging transmission fees as a type 
of spread pricing. Additionally, DHS disagrees that the transmission fee should be disclosed to 
DHS and accounted for when calculating the Managed Care Organizations’ (MCOs’) Medical 
Loss Ratios (MLRs). We note DHS’ disagreements and assertions below along with DAG’s 
conclusions as to each of DHS’ statements. 
 
As reported in our audit, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) stated in the 
2019 Informational Bulletin that any difference between the amount the MCO paid the PBM and 
the PBM paid the pharmacy for drug claims in which the PBM retains an additional revenue 
source to cover the PBM’s costs for services procured by the MCO, is spread pricing. It further 
stated that this is an administrative cost to the MCO that should be accounted for in the MLR and 
when setting future capitation rates.
48 
 
Finding 1 – DHS did not effectively monitor pharmacy drug claims which resulted in 
undisclosed spread pricing, overstated pharmacy data, and a lack of transparency. 
 
DHS’ inaccurate perception that it lacks authority to audit PBMs. 
 
DHS Assertion – “While the DHS Bureau of Program Integrity [BPI] does not have oversight 
authority over the PBMs, DHS is aware that the Office of Medical Assistance Programs  
(OMAP) has the authority to audit PBMs. However, DHS has historically held the MCOs 
responsible as the prime agreement holders for ensuring their subcontractors are compliant with 
all requirements.” 
 
DAG Response – DAG disagrees that DHS’ BPI does not have authority to audit the PBMs. If 
OMAP has the authority to audit PBMs, then so does BPI. There is a difference between an 
agency having the authority to audit PBMs and an Office or Bureau within the agency being 
assigned the duty to audit the PBM. 
 
48 CIB: Medical Loss Ratio (MLR) Requirements Related to Third-Party Vendors (medicaid.gov) and CMS Issues 
New Guidance Addressing Spread Pricing in Medicaid, Ensures Pharmacy Benefit Managers are not Up- Charging 
Taxpayers | CMS ( last accessed June 28, 2024).   
===PAGE 46===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
39 
DHS’ ineffective monitoring of MCOs’ reports on pharmacy data. 
 
DHS Assertion – “DHS disagrees with the auditor’s conclusion that transmission fees constitute 
spread pricing.”  
 
DAG Response – DAG disagrees. The May 15, 2019 CMS Informational Bulletin is clear in 
stating that a PBM needs to classify and report its revenues and expenditures to the MCO for the 
MCO to accurately reflect medical costs and non-medical administrative costs for the MLR. The 
transmission fees, permitted under Act 120 of 2020, is an administrative fee charged by the PBM 
to the pharmacy and should be reported as an administrative cost for the MCO’s MLR, in 
addition to the amount the MCO pays the PBM for processing claims.  
 
The following chart is an illustration of the amounts the MCOs paid to the PBMs, the amounts 
the PBMs paid to the pharmacies, the difference of the two amounts paid which is the spread or 
retained differential caused from the transmission fees, and the amount the MCOs paid the PBMs 
to process the claims for calendar year 2022.  
 
Source: Developed by DAG auditors based on information received from the Transparency Reports obtained from 
DHS. As noted in Appendix A, the data from the Transparency Reports obtained from DHS is of undetermined 
reliability; however, this is the best data available. Although this determination may affect the precision of the 
numbers we present, there is sufficient evidence in total to support our findings and conclusions.  
 
As illustrated, the spread or retained differential for the transmission fees was nearly $7 million 
that the PBMs charged pharmacies over and above the $63 million the MCOs paid the PBMs for 
services. DHS’ lack of knowledge of the transmission fees and its inaccurate classification of the 
 
 
MCO 
 
 
PBM 
 
Amount MCO 
Paid to PBM 
Amount PBM 
Paid to 
Pharmacies 
Spread 
Amount kept 
by PBM 
MCO Admin. 
Fees Paid to 
PBM 
1 PBM 1 $460,162,581 $459,636,599 $526,001 $4,879,515 
2 PBM 1 631,851,875 631,096,755 755,120 13,431,427 
3 PBM 1 885,480,707 884,592,719 887,988 19,219,940 
4 PBM 2 618,914,570 617,759,869 1,154,701 5,418,836 
5 PBM 2 414,646,906 413,807,469 839,437 3,238,162 
6 PBM 3 298,234,020 298,234,020 - 4,857,864 
7 PBM 4 1,011,466,928 1,009,246,871 2,220,057 9,169,748 
8A PBM 2 236,484,329 236,070,755 413,574 2,878,787  
Totals $4,557,241,916 $4,550,445,057 $6,796,878 $63,094,279 
A MCO 8 was not included in our test work for Finding 1 in the report since the population for the DHS 
PROMISeTM encounter data was selected for October 2022, and MCO 8 was no longer in the HealthChoices 
program as of August 31, 2022. 
===PAGE 47===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
40 
costs as pharmacy costs and not costs of the HealthChoices program should be addressed by 
DHS with CMS for further clarification. 
 
DHS Assertion – “The standardized, HIPAA compliant, National Council for Prescription Drug 
Programs (NCPDP) electronic pharmacy claim transaction does not include a field for the 
transmission fee. Therefore, the MCO drug encounters received by DHS do not include the 
transmission fee.” 
 
DAG Response – DAG agrees that the encounter records do not report the transmission fees, 
and therefore, the encounter records are overstated because the amounts listed as the paid 
amounts are the amounts the MCO paid and not the amounts the PBM paid to the pharmacies 
which were reduced by the transmission fees. DHS should consult with CMS or the NCPDP to 
determine how to report transmission fees that are permitted by Act 120 of 2020 and not 
prohibited by the federal government.  
 
DHS Assertion – “DHS disagrees with the finding that the 4C and Transparency Reports were 
inaccurate.” 
 
DAG response – DAG disagrees. DHS provided additional information or amended reports for 
the MCOs that failed to disclose the MCO administrative fees and/or the Pharmacy transmission 
fees based on the auditors’ inquiries. Additionally, DHS management stated that none of the 
calendar year 2022 Report 4Cs contained adjustments for a spread pricing differential because all 
of the PBMs are practicing pass-through pricing. However, our audit found that there are 
differentials for the MCOs’ PBMs that charge transmission fees, and therefore, DAG asserts both 
reports from the MCOs were misleading and inaccurate.  
 
DHS’ ineffective monitoring and lack of validating pharmacy encounter data to source 
documents resulted in DHS’ unawareness of spread pricing.  
 
DHS Assertion – “DHS considers the MCO submitted drug encounters and additional claim 
data to be the source documents for monitoring spread pricing between the MCO their 
subcontracted PBM and the PBMs contracted pharmacy.” 
 
DAG Response – DAG disagrees. According to the State Toolkit for Validating Medicaid 
Managed Care Encounter Data prepared by CMS, dated August 2019 and amended after our 
audit period, data sources include, but are not limited to, claims data and remittance advices from 
the plans or plans’ subcontractors, like PBMs.  
 
===PAGE 48===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
41 
DHS Assertion – “DHS would like to understand how the auditor would characterize the PBM 
and pharmacy fees if the pharmacies made a separate payment to the PBM as opposed to the 
remittance advice showing a payment withhold. DHS would also like to know if the auditor 
reviewed the PBM and pharmacy contract payment provisions to determine if transmission fees 
are disclosed and collected per the terms and conditions of that contract.” 
 
DAG Response – DAG would characterize the PBM and pharmacy fees collected separately 
from the drug claim’s remittance advice as spread pricing that is noncompliant with Act 120 of 
2020 Section 449(h)(3) and (4)
49 because the fees in this scenario would be a differential that is 
prohibited under subsection (3) and would also be transmission fees that were not processed 
during adjudication in non-compliance with subsection (4). Additionally, DAG reviewed 
pharmacy contract payment provisions to determine if the drug and dispensing fees were 
collected per the terms and conditions of the contract. We did not request or review the 
pharmacy contract provisions regarding transmission fees since they were assessed at the same 
fee amount for the applicable pharmacies for that MCO unless it met other criteria, like a vaccine 
that had no fee. However, we found that the transmission fees were transparent to the pharmacies 
for PerformRx, LLC as noted in Finding 3 of our audit report. 
 
DHS Assertion Seven – “The report did not identify any evidence of spread pricing as described 
by CMS. DHS monitors spread pricing through reporting in the aggregate and has not identified 
spread pricing. The draft reports states that monitoring should be done on an individual claim 
level. This recommendation is based on the auditor’s inaccurate description of spread pricing.” 
  
DAG Response – DAG disagrees. As previously noted, DAG did identify evidence of spread 
pricing by the PBMs that charge pharmacies transmission fees as described by CMS. See also the 
table above that indicates that seven of the eight PBMs were paying the pharmacies less than the 
MCOs were paying the PBMs for the same drug claim, totaling nearly $7 million in additional 
revenue to the PBMs for calendar year 2022. 
 
DHS Assertion – “The audit report discloses no evidence that individual claim monitoring 
would yield different results than aggregate monitoring.” 
 
DAG Response – DAG disagrees. As detailed in the audit report, our audit procedures 
identified undisclosed transmission fees paid by pharmacies to PBMs and a voided prescription 
claim record that was not properly voided in PROMISe
TM by the PBM. DHS’ lack of awareness 
 
49 62 P.S. § 449(h)(3)-(4).   
 
===PAGE 49===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
42 
was confirmed during meetings between the auditors and DHS management. Had DHS 
monitored pharmacy claims on an individual basis, at least for a sample of claims, DHS may 
have identified the overstated pharmacy drug encounter data and the potential weakness in the 
process for rejected voids that are not resubmitted. 
 
DHS Assertion – “If DHS identifies spread pricing, as described by CMS, and prohibited by the 
HealthChoices agreement and Act 120 of 2020, the MCOs will be held accountable for the non-
compliance of their subcontractors.”  
 
DAG Response – DAG disagrees with DHS’ assertion that the HealthChoices agreement and 
Act 120 of 2020 prohibit spread pricing for the PBM transmission fees. The transmission fees are 
a legalized type of spread pricing based on CMS description and Act 120 of 2020. Additionally, 
the HealthChoices agreement has the following provision that does not indicate spread pricing is 
prohibited:  
 
Appendix BBB.  
 
9. Drug Encounters b. …For all Drug Encounter data… the following data elements are 
required… iii. Actual paid amount by the PH-MCO, or the PH-MCO’s PBM, to the 
provider for the drug dispensed. 
… 
14. Pharmacy Benefit Manager (PBM) The PH-MCO must: … c. Report differences 
between the amount paid by the PH-MCO to the PBM and the amount paid by the PBM 
to the providers of covered drugs as administrative fees.”  
 
The agreement provisions are consistent with DAG’s audit recommending that DHS, not just the 
MCOs, should be monitoring the PBMs for compliance. 
 
DHS Assertion – “DHS investigated the one voided pharmacy claim identified in the report and 
concluded that the claim was paid to the pharmacy, and DHS received the paid MCO drug 
encounter. The discrepancy was related to encounter file load timing lag which was identified 
and resolved in late 2022 – early 2023.” 
 
DAG Response – DAG agrees that the voided pharmacy claim in question was initially paid to 
the pharmacy and DHS received the paid MCO drug encounter; however, we disagree that the 
voided transaction problem was due to a “file load timing lag” issue. The claim in question was 
subsequently reversed by the pharmacy, refunded to the PBM, and submitted to DHS for 
reversal. That reversal was rejected by the DHS PROMISe
TM  and not properly resubmitted by 
===PAGE 50===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
43 
the PBM, causing the DHS encounter record to be overstated by the amount of that claim as of 
June 6, 2024. DHS’ lack of claim-specific monitoring of pharmacy claims and PBM practices is 
inadequate to ensure the HealthChoices program is compliant with federal and state laws. Had 
DHS performed claim-specific monitoring, it may have discovered system weaknesses like the 
overstated claim that was subsequently voided, rejected by PROMISe
TM, and not resubmitted by 
the PBMs or MCOs.  
 
DHS Assertion – “The transmission fees paid by the pharmacies to the PBM are a cost to the 
pharmacy, not an administrative cost to the MCO and are therefore not reported by the MCO on 
the MLR reports. Because the transmission fees are not an expense of the MCOs, they would not 
have been included in the MCO cost reports, which are the reports that would have supported the 
$4.6 billion in drug expenditures.”  
 
DAG Response – DAG disagrees. Although the transmission fees are a cost to the pharmacy, 
they are revenue to the PBM, and therefore, should be reported to the MCOs for proper 
accounting in the MLR. 
 
DHS Assertion – “The auditors’ suggestion that CMS might disallow federal financial 
participation because of ineffective monitoring is based on what the auditors consider spread 
pricing. In any event, ineffective monitoring is not a basis for disallowing the entire $4.6 billion 
in drug expenditures. Moreover, the result of what the auditors believe was the ineffective 
monitoring was $7 million in transmission fees paid by the pharmacies to the PBMs which they 
believe should be subtracted from the MCO’s incurred claims in the MLR calculations.” 
 
DAG Response – DAG disagrees that the audit indicated that the entire $4.6 billion in drug-
related expenditures would be disallowed. DAG asserted that the totality of DHS’ ineffective 
monitoring could put the Federal dollars at risk of CMS disallowance. A disallowance is where 
the State is required to pay back a percentage or portion of the Federal funds to CMS.  
 
Recommendations for Finding 1 
 
DHS Response to Recommendation 1 – “DHS disagrees with this recommendation. We have 
written policies and procedures for monitoring pharmacy encounter data.”  
 
DAG Response – DAG disagrees. DAG first requested DHS policies and procedures related to 
the audit objectives on November 13, 2023. In response DHS provided numerous MCO reports, 
MCO prepared monitoring reports, systems notices, MCO operations memorandums, participant 
denial notices, MCO policy and procedures manual, and reporting templates. Since subsequent 
===PAGE 51===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
44 
emails and conversations did not result in the receipt of DHS specific policies and procedures, 
DAG then requested on May 20, 2024, DHS policies and procedures specifically for encounter 
data validation. DHS responded with Code of Federal Regulations citations, agreement 
requirements, CMS requirements, and NCPDP formatting requirements. No internal DHS 
written policies and procedures detailing how and when DHS monitors PBM encounter data 
were ever produced by DHS. 
 
DHS Response to Recommendation 2 and Recommendation 3 – “DHS disagrees with this 
recommendation. The audit disclosed no evidence that individual claim monitoring would yield 
different results than aggregate monitoring. While we don’t think this is necessary, we will 
consider this recommendation.” 
 
DAG Response – DAG disagrees. As detailed in the audit report and above, our audit 
procedures identified undisclosed transmissions fees paid by pharmacies to PBMs and a voided 
prescription claim record that was not properly voided in PROMISe
TM by the PBM. However, 
DAG is pleased that DHS will consider Recommendations 2 and 3. 
 
DHS Response to Recommendation 4 – “DHS disagrees with this recommendation. DHS 
already includes all pharmacy encounter information in the Triennial audit.” 
 
DAG Response – DAG agrees that DHS likely provided the vendor with the pharmacy 
encounter data. DHS, however, stated the current triennial audit will be the same process used in 
2021 for the completed triennial audit of 2019 HealthChoices data which did not include a 
validation of DHS encounter records against source systems, such as the PBM’s claims 
processing system, and medical records, such as pharmacy claims. 
 
DHS Response to Recommendations 5 and 6 – DHS will consider this recommendation. 
 
DAG Response – DAG is pleased that DHS will consider Recommendations 5 and 6. 
 
DHS Response to Recommendation 7 – “DHS disagrees with this recommendation. The 
transmission fees paid by the pharmacies to the PBM are a cost to the pharmacy, not an 
administrative cost to the MCO and are therefore not included in encounter data, MLR 
calculations, or capitation rates.”  
 
DAG Response – DAG disagrees. The transmission fees the PBM charges the pharmacies are a 
source of revenue to the PBM and therefore should be reported as a reduction to the drug claim 
as an administrative cost on the encounter record, should be reported to the MCOs for MLR 
===PAGE 52===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
45 
calculations, and should be reported to the actuaries for future capitated rates, consistent with the 
CMS 2019 guidance.50  
 
Finding 2 – DHS did not effectively monitor contracts between the Physical HealthChoices 
managed care organizations and pharmacy benefit managers. 
 
Recommendations for Finding 2 
 
DHS Response to Recommendation 1 – “DHS disagrees with this recommendation. DHS holds 
the MCOs responsible as the prime agreement holders for ensuring their subcontractors are 
compliant with all requirements. DHS requests the MCO take corrective actions when it becomes 
aware that a subcontractor is not compliant with requirements of the HealthChoices agreement.” 
 
DAG Response – DAG disagrees that DHS should solely rely on the MCOs to do the 
monitoring of the PBMs since several of the MCOs and PBMs are part of the same network of 
companies. Due to conflicts of interest, it is imperative that DHS recognize the need for its 
independent monitoring of PBMs, especially those within the same MCOs’ corporate network. 
 
DHS Responses to Recommendations 2, 3, 4, and 5 – DHS will consider these 
recommendations.  
 
DAG Response – DAG is pleased that DHS will consider Recommendations 2, 3, 4, and 5. 
 
 
 
50 Id. 
===PAGE 53===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
46 
PerformRx, LLC Finding 3 – PerformRx, LLC was transparent and 
accountable to the pharmacies for transmission fees but was not transparent 
to the MCOs and DHS regarding the fees which resulted in undisclosed 
spread pricing.  
 
During calendar year 2022, PerformRx, LLC (PerformRx) was the pharmacy benefit manager 
(PBM) for three of the Physical HealthChoices (HealthChoices) managed care organizations 
(MCOs). The three MCOs were AmeriHealth, Keystone First, and Geisinger. Our performance 
audit determined that PerformRx was partially compliant with Act 120 of 2020 since the 
transmission fees it charged were disclosed to the pharmacies and processed during adjudication, 
but they failed to disclose and report the transmission fees to the three MCOs and the 
Pennsylvania Department of Human Services (DHS). 
 
Act 120 of 2020 requires that PBMs charging a transmission or transaction fee to pharmacies 
must disclose the fee and process the fee at the time of adjudication.
51 To ensure the 
requirements set forth by Act 120 of 2020 were met, we reviewed PerformRx’s procedures for 
processing drug claims for HealthChoices and examined the following: 
 
1. Whether the contracts between PerformRx and MCOs disclosed that PerformRx will 
charge transmission fees to the pharmacies; 
 
2. Whether PerformRx practices spread pricing based on the following: 
  
a. Whether the payments for claims from the MCO to PerformRx are the same 
amount that PerformRx paid the pharmacies;  
 
b. Whether transmission fees, if charged, were disclosed to the pharmacies on 
the remittance advices from PerformRx; and  
 
c. Whether the payment information in DHS’ PROMISe
TM agrees with the 
amount actually paid to the pharmacy;52  
 
 
51 Adjudication is when the PBM makes payment to reimburse the pharmacy for the drug claim being processed. 
52 DHS system notice #SYS-2019-031 states, in part, “All drug encounters must include the actual total amount 
paid to the dispensing provider, regardless if the MCO paid directly or the claim was paid by a subcontractor of 
the MCO.” Emphasis added. 
===PAGE 54===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
47 
3. Whether pharmacies knew that PerformRx reduced its drug payments by a 
transmission fee per claim based on confirmations sent to selected pharmacies; and 
 
4. Whether the MCOs reported PerformRx’ transmission fees on the MCOs’ Outpatient 
Drug Pricing Transparency (Part D) reports (Transparency Reports) completed 
quarterly and submitted to DHS. 
 
 
PerformRx contracts with HealthChoices MCOs 
 
We obtained the Geisinger contract with PerformRx and the joint contract between AmeriHealth 
and Keystone First with PerformRx. Our review of the two contracts found that each contained 
provisions that allowed PerformRx to charge a transmission fee to the pharmacies. This provides 
notice to the three MCOs that there may be spread pricing, and therefore, the MCOs were aware 
or should have been aware that PerformRx may charge pharmacies a transmission fee. According 
to PerformRx, the transmission fees are charged to the pharmacies as administrative fees to 
reduce the amount paid by the MCOs. 
 
 
Testing for Spread Pricing 
 
We tested pharmacy drug claims for all three MCOs. To do this, PerformRx provided its 
monthly claims data for calendar year 2022 for each of the three MCOs. According to that data, a 
total of 34,346,412 claims were processed by PerformRx in calendar year 2022 for the three 
MCOs, and a total of $1.8 billion was paid to the pharmacies for those claims.
53  
 
We selected 20 claims per MCO from the claims data provided by PerformRx, for a total 
selection of 60 claims. To select the 20 claims for each MCO, we haphazardly selected 12 
claims, one per month, and judgmentally selected eight claims based on other criteria, such as 
claims that appeared to be an adjustment. Based on the total selection of 60 claims, we obtained 
the following supporting documentation from PerformRx: 
 
• Claim transaction detail from PerformRx’s claims processing system for the selected 
claim and any prior or subsequent information associated with that claim; 
• Pharmacy contract payment provisions; 
 
53 See Appendix A for details regarding assessment of data reliability.  
===PAGE 55===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
48 
• Documentation of MCO payments to the PBM for the claims; and 
• Remittance advices from PerformRx to the pharmacies for the claims. 
 
To facilitate our review, PerformRx explained the claims process as described in the Introduction 
and Background section of this audit report. Additionally, PerformRx indicated that the 
pharmacies may reverse, or void claims, each month for several reasons, for instance, if the 
member does not pick up the prescription, the pharmacist will return the medication to inventory 
and submit a reversal transaction to negate the claim. If the reversal is entered within the same 
financial cycle as the original claim, it becomes an in-cycle reversal, and the two transactions 
cancel each other out. Therefore, for an in-cycle reversal, no encounter has taken place with a 
drug and a Medicaid member, so it is not a transaction submitted to the MCO or subsequently 
recorded in PROMISe
TM. 
 
Alternatively, an out-of-cycle adjustment occurs when a reversal is processed after the financial 
cycle in which the original claim was created. Since the first transaction created a payment to the 
pharmacy and an encounter record in PROMISe
TM, another transaction is required to recoup the 
payment from the pharmacy and to reduce the amount paid by the PBM in the PROMISeTM 
record. The two transactions result in two remittance advices to the pharmacy, one for the 
original claim’s payment and a second one for the reversing transaction to recoup the funds from 
the pharmacy.  
 
Of the 60 claims tested, totaling $108,723.38 in transactions, we found four of the 60 claims did 
not include a transmission fee, and were therefore pass-through pricing, with no spread between 
the MCO payment and the PBM payment. Thirteen claims were reversed in-cycle with no 
remittance advices or PROMISeTM encounter records, and the remaining 43 claims had the 
following exceptions: 
 
• 42 claims had an MCO payment to PerformRx that was higher than the amount 
PerformRx paid to the pharmacy due to a transmission fee, creating a spread in pricing. 
Additionally, the MCO payment amount was recorded in the PROMISeTM encounter 
record rather than the lower actual amount paid to the pharmacy. This type of spread 
pricing overstates the pharmacy encounter data in PROMISeTM. (See E-1 and E-2 in the 
table in Appendix F.) 
 
• One claim listed as an out-of-cycle reversal was not properly voided in PROMISeTM 
because the reversing transaction was rejected by PROMISeTM and was not resubmitted 
by PerformRx. (See E-3 in the table in Appendix F.) Again, resulting in an overstated 
PROMISeTM encounter record. 
===PAGE 56===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
49 
Although PerformRx disclosed transmission fees to the pharmacies on remittance advices at the 
time of payment, the encounter records submitted to the MCOs and to DHS did not report the 
transmission fees. Therefore, it was not transparent to the MCO or to DHS that the MCO 
payment to the PBM and the PBM payment to the pharmacies were different. Although DHS 
procedures and system notices indicate the amount to be recorded in the encounter record is to be 
the actual amount paid to the pharmacy, PerformRx did not offset the MCO amount paid by the 
transmission fees, resulting in undisclosed spread pricing. 
 
We also noted during our audit procedures that the pharmacies do not pay transmission fees for 
in-cycle reversals since there are no payment remittances. The out-of-cycle reversals, however, 
do result in the pharmacies paying a transmission fee for the initial claim and another 
transmission fee for the reversal transaction. One fee is retained by the PBM, and one fee is used 
to pay back the MCO for the full amount the MCO initially paid the PBM. 
 
 
Pharmacy Confirmation Results 
 
To determine whether the pharmacies actually knew that they were charged a transmission fee 
per claim, we sent confirmations to the 18 corporate pharmacies associated with the 60 claims. 
Each of the 18 pharmacies responded and 6 confirmed the amount listed on the PROMISe
TM 
encounter record was reduced by a fee. Although only 6 of the 18 pharmacies confirmed 17 of 
the 60 claims included transmission fees that reduced the reimbursement paid by PerformRx, we 
concluded that PerformRx adequately and transparently disclosed the transmission fees to the 
respective pharmacies on remittance advices.
  
 
 
DHS Transparency Reports 
 
Since our testing revealed that the encounter records sent to DHS did not include the 
transmission fees that were charged to the pharmacies, we obtained the calendar year 2022 
quarterly Transparency Reports from DHS that require the MCOs to report MCO administrative 
fees for the PBM services and PBM transmission fees charged to the pharmacies. Our review of 
the calendar year 2022 reports for these three MCOs found that no transmission fees were 
disclosed on the Transparency Reports, even though we found transmission fees were being 
charged to pharmacies. 
 
===PAGE 57===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
50 
After we raised this lack of disclosure with DHS, DHS provided revised Transparency Reports 
for the three MCOs, adding $2 million in transmission fees not previously reported to DHS on 
the Transparency Reports. According to PerformRx, it was unaware of the reporting requirement 
that resulted in the unintentional omission of the data; therefore, it recreated the past deficient 
reports for the MCOs and remedied the defect going forward. 
 
 
In Summary 
 
Although PerformRx adequately and accurately disclosed transmission fees to the pharmacies, 
PerformRx failed to disclose the transmission fees to the MCOs and DHS which violates the 
transparency requirements set forth by Act 120 of 2020. Therefore, PerformRx was not fully 
compliant with the statutory and regulatory standards. This undermines the transparency 
requirements required for spread pricing practices.  
 
 
Recommendations for PerformRx, LLC Finding 3 
 
We recommend that PerformRx: 
 
1. Continue to be transparent with pharmacies regarding the transmission fees and 
determine if the transmission fee is justifiable since MCOs already pay PerformRx for the 
processing of the claims.  
 
2. Implement procedures to ensure compliance with Act 120’s transparency requirement, 
not only with the pharmacies, but also with the MCOs and DHS. 
 
3. Monitor out-of-cycle reversals that are rejected by PROMISe
TM in order to resubmit the 
reversing transaction within the time requirements allowed by the HealthChoices 
agreement to ensure the DHS PROMISe
TM encounter data is not overstated. 
 
 
===PAGE 58===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
51 
PerformRx, LLC’s Response and Auditor’s Conclusion 
 
We provided copies of our draft audit finding and related recommendations to PerformRx, LLC 
(PerformRx) for its review. On the pages that follow, we included PerformRx’s response in its 
entirety. Following PerformRx’s response is our auditor’s conclusion. 
 
 
===PAGE 59===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
52 
Audit Response from PerformRx, LLC 
 
 

===PAGE 60===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
53 

===PAGE 61===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
54 
Auditor’s Conclusion to PerformRx, LLC’s Response 
 
PerformRx, LLC management (PerformRx) is generally in agreement with Finding 3 and 
acknowledges it charged managed care organizations (MCOs) for contracted services, charged 
pharmacies administrative transmission fees, recorded the encounter records at the higher MCO 
paid amount rather than the actual payment amount that was reduced by the transmission fee, and 
paid the pharmacies based on the pharmacy’s contractual reimbursement rates.  
 
PerformRx, however, compares charging the pharmacies a transmission fee on a per-claim basis 
as “akin to a credit card transaction fee charged by a retail merchant.” The Pennsylvania 
Department of the Auditor General (DAG) disagrees with this analogy because a retail store 
pays a merchant a fee for processing the retail store’s credit card transactions from its customers, 
akin to the MCO paying the PBM for processing drug claims for the MCO’s pharmacy benefit 
for its Medicaid members. The PBM’s transmission fee charged to the pharmacy would be 
comparable to the merchant charging a fee to the retail store and to the credit card bank.  
 
PerformRx management also disagreed with DAG’s Recommendation 1 to the extent that it 
implies transmission fees are not justifiable because the transmission fee is a pharmacy fee in 
addition to the MCO payments for PerformRx’s services. PerformRx indicates the pharmacy 
transmission fees are to reduce the MCOs administrative burden by offsetting the cost of 
administering the network and processing claims on the MCO’s behalf. DAG disagrees that the 
fee is justifiable because DHS pays the MCOs a capitated rate to administer the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid program which includes the cost of administering a pharmacy network 
and processing pharmacy claims. If the MCO chooses to use a PBM rather than do the services 
itself, the MCO contracts and pays the PBM for the services. This administrative expense, 
whether incurred by the MCO or the PBM, is already considered in the capitation rates paid to 
the MCO. Therefore, the PBM should not be supplementing its revenue by charging the 
pharmacies a fee for services it is already contracted to do for an MCO. 
 
In addition, PerformRx does not agree that the differential created by the transmission fee is 
spread pricing because the transmission fee is not applied to the ingredient cost and/or 
professional dispensing fee. DAG disagrees, since the transmission fee offsets the total amount 
to be paid on the payment remittance on a per-claim basis. Act 120 of 2020 requires that if 
transmission fees are charged, that they are to be processed during adjudication. This provides 
more transparency to the pharmacy. Transmission fees directly reduce the pharmacies’ ingredient 
cost and professional dispensing fee on a per-claim basis, like third-party liabilities and member 
co-payments.  
===PAGE 62===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
55 
Although PerformRx acknowledged that the transmission fee is an administrative fee to the 
pharmacies and is in addition to the MCO’s administrative fees, PerformRx asserts that the fee is 
part of the drug cost recorded on the encounter record because the National Council for 
Prescription Drug Programs (NCPDP) format has no field available for reporting transmission 
fees. DAG disagrees, since according to DHS’ system notice #SYS-2018-025, effective 
February 1, 2019, and a clarification notice, #SYS-2019-031, both state that the actual total 
amount paid on the encounter record must be the actual total amount paid to the dispensing 
provider, regardless of who paid the dispensing provider (the MCO or the PBM).
54,55 
 
PerformRx further stated that reducing the encounter record without a designated field for 
transmission fees would inaccurately reflect the MCO paid amount and artificially reduce the 
reported drug spend. Again, DAG disagrees, in that the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid 
Services (CMS) May 15, 2019, Informational Bulletin (CMS 2019 guidance) indicates that the 
amounts paid for benefits or activities that improve the Medicaid member’s health care quality 
are to be distinguished from amounts paid for administrative services.
56 Therefore, since the 
transmission fee is not improving the Medicaid recipient’s health, the transmission fee should be 
reflected on the encounter record as a reduction of payment, similar to the third-party liability 
payments and member’s copay that reduce the amount paid to the pharmacy. Additionally, 
reporting the amount paid by the MCO rather than the actual amount paid to the pharmacy less 
the transmission fee overstates the following: 
 
o The drug costs reported to the MCO;  
 
o The MCO’s Medical Loss Ratio (MLR) medical spend (See Appendix C of this 
report);  
 
o The drug costs reported to DHS for its actuaries to properly account for drug costs for 
future capitation rate setting; and  
 
 
54 DHS system notice #SYS-2018-031, effective February 1, 2019, states, in part “The total paid amount field in 
each pharmacy encounter must accurately represent the actual amount paid by the [PBM] to the dispensing 
pharmacy provider.”  
55 DHS system notice #SYS-2019-031, states in part, “All drug encounters must include the actual total amount 
paid to the dispensing provider, regardless if the MCO paid directly or the claim was paid by a subcontractor of 
the MCO.” (Emphasis added). This clarifies that the encounter record’s MCO Amount Paid and Total Amount Paid 
are to reflect the actual amount paid to the pharmacy, regardless of which entity, the MCO or the PBM, pays the 
dispensing provider. 
56 CMS Issues New Guidance Addressing Spread Pricing in Medicaid, Ensures Pharmacy Benefit Managers are not 
Up-Charging Taxpayers | CMS ( last accessed June 28, 2024). 
===PAGE 63===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
56 
o The drug costs reported to CMS for the amounts actually spent on drug costs for the 
HealthChoices program. 
  
In summary, DAG still recommends PerformRx reconsider the need to charge the pharmacies a 
transmission fee and, if considered necessary, renegotiate the administration costs it charges the 
MCOs. Additionally, if the reporting format for the encounter record requires additional coding 
to improve the reportability of the transmission fee as a reduction to the amount paid, similar to 
how third party liabilities and member copays are accounted for, PerformRx should work with 
the responsible parties to add the field so the encounter record accurately reflects the actual 
amount paid to the dispensing provider as required by Act 120 of 2020, DHS, and CMS. 
 
 
===PAGE 64===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
57 
Appendix A Objectives, Scope, Methodology, and Data Reliability 
 
The Department of the Auditor General (Department) conducted this performance audit pursuant 
to Sections 402 and 403 of The Fiscal Code57 and Section 449.2 of the Human Services Code.58  
 
We conducted this performance audit in accordance with generally accepted government 
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain 
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions 
based on our audit objectives.
59 We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable 
basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. 
 
Refer to the Introduction and Background section of this audit report for how the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program (HealthChoices) and the Pharmacy Benefit Manager (PBM) 
included in our audit were selected.  
 
 
Objectives 
 
Our performance audit objectives were as follows: 
 
Pertaining to the Pennsylvania Department of Human Services (DHS): 
 
1. Determine whether DHS effectively monitors the PBMs’ pharmacy claims, including, but 
not limited to, the accuracy of the pharmacy information used to prepare the capitation 
rates for the HealthChoices Medicaid program. 
 
2. Determine whether DHS effectively monitors the PBMs’ contracts to ensure compliance 
and transparency for the HealthChoices Medicaid program. 
 
Pertaining to PerformRx, LLC (PerformRx): 
 
3. Determine if the PBM is compliant with 62 P.S. § 449(h)(3) and (4) of the Human 
Services Code (as amended by Act 120 of 2020) regarding charges and fees paid to the 
 
57 See 72 P.S. §§ 402 and 403. 
58 See 62 P.S. § 449.2, effective December 27, 2022 (Act 98 of 2022). 
59 U.S. Government Accountability Office. Government Auditing Standards. 2018 Revision Technical Update April 
2021. 
===PAGE 65===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
58 
PBM by the pharmacies, or pharmacy service organizations, as compared to the 
corresponding amounts billed to the applicable HealthChoices MCOs to ensure 
transparency, compliance, and accountability for the HealthChoices Medicaid Program. 
 
 
Scope 
 
This performance audit covered the period January 1, 2022, through December 31, 2022.  
 
DHS and PerformRx management are responsible for establishing and maintaining effective 
internal controls to provide reasonable assurance of compliance with applicable laws, 
regulations, and administrative policies and procedures. In conducting our audit, we obtained an 
understanding of DHS’ and PerformRx’s internal controls, including information system 
controls.  
 
Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government (also known as and hereafter referred 
to as the Green Book), issued by the Comptroller General of the United States, provides a 
framework for management to establish and maintain an effective internal control system.
60 We 
used the framework included in the Green Book when assessing the DHS and PerformRx 
internal control systems. 
 
The Green Book’s standards are organized into five components of internal control. In an 
effective system of internal control, these five components work together in an integrated manner 
to help an entity achieve its objectives. The five components contain 17 related principles, listed 
in the table below, which are the requirements an entity should follow in establishing an effective 
system of internal control. 
 
We determined that all of the internal control components are significant to the three audit 
objectives. The table below represents a summary of the level of the internal control assessment 
for effectiveness of design (D); implementation (I); or operating effectiveness (OE) that we 
performed for each principle with respect to both DHS and PerformRx, along with a conclusion 
regarding whether issues were found with the principles, and if those issues are included in a 
finding.
61 
 
60 Even though the Green Book was written for the federal government, it explicitly states that it may also be 
adopted by state, local, and quasi-government entities, as well as not-for-profit organizations, as a framework for 
establishing and maintaining an effective internal control system.  
61 The Green Book, Sections OV3.05 and 3.06, states the following regarding the level of assessment of internal 
controls. Evaluating the design of internal control includes determining if controls individually and in combination 
===PAGE 66===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
59 
 DHS 
(Objectives 1 and 2) 
PerformRx 
(Objective 3) 
 
Component 
 
Principle 
Level of 
Assessment 
 
Conclusion 
Level of 
Assessment 
 
Conclusion 
Control 
Environment 
1 The oversight body and 
management should 
demonstrate a 
commitment to integrity 
and ethical values. 
D No issues D No issues 
2 The oversight body 
should oversee the 
entity’s internal control 
system. 
D No issues D No issues 
3 Management should 
establish an 
organizational structure, 
assign responsibility, 
and delegate authority 
to achieve the entity’s 
objectives. 
D No issues D No issues 
4 Management should 
demonstrate a 
commitment to recruit, 
develop, and retain 
competent individuals. 
D No issues D No issues 
5 Management should 
evaluate performance 
and hold individuals 
accountable for their 
internal control 
responsibilities. 
D No issues D No issues 
Risk 
Assessment 
6 Management should 
define objectives clearly 
to enable the 
identification of risks 
and define risk 
tolerances. 
D No issues D No issues 
 
with other controls are capable of achieving an objective and addressing related risks. Evaluating implementation 
includes determining if the control exists and if the entity has placed the control into operation. Evaluating operating 
effectiveness includes determining if controls were applied at relevant times during the audit period, the consistency 
with which they were applied, and by whom or by what means they were applied.   
===PAGE 67===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
60 
 DHS 
(Objectives 1 and 2) 
PerformRx 
(Objective 3) 
 
Component 
 
Principle 
Level of 
Assessment 
 
Conclusion 
Level of 
Assessment 
 
Conclusion 
7 Management should 
identify, analyze, and 
respond to risks related 
to achieving the defined 
objectives. 
D No issues D No issues 
8 Management should 
consider the potential 
for fraud when 
identifying, analyzing, 
and responding to risks. 
D, I Finding 1 
Finding 2 
D No issues 
9 Management should 
identify, analyze, and 
respond to significant 
changes that could 
impact the internal 
control system. 
D No issues D No issues 
Control 
Activities 
10 Management should 
design control activities 
to achieve objectives 
and respond to risks. 
D, I, OE Finding 1 
Finding 2 
D, I, OE Finding 3 
11 Management should 
design the entity’s 
information system and 
related control activities 
to achieve objectives 
and respond to risks. 
D No issues D No issues 
12 Management should 
implement control 
activities through 
policies. 
D, I, OE Finding 1 
Finding 2 
D, I No issues 
Information and 
Communication 
13 Management should use 
quality information to 
achieve the entity’s 
objectives. 
D, I, OE Finding 1 
Finding 2 
D, I, OE No issues 
14 Management should 
internally communicate 
the necessary quality 
information to achieve 
the entity’s objectives. 
D, I, OE Finding 1 
Finding 2 
D, I No issues 
===PAGE 68===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
61 
 DHS 
(Objectives 1 and 2) 
PerformRx 
(Objective 3) 
 
Component 
 
Principle 
Level of 
Assessment 
 
Conclusion 
Level of 
Assessment 
 
Conclusion 
15 Management should 
externally communicate 
the necessary quality 
information to achieve 
the entity’s objectives. 
D, I, OE Finding 1 
Finding 2 
D, I, OE Finding 3 
Monitoring 16 Management should 
establish and operate 
monitoring activities to 
monitor the internal 
control system and 
evaluate results. 
D, I, OE Finding 1 
Finding 2 
D, I, OE Finding 3 
17 Management should 
remediate identified 
internal control 
deficiencies on a timely 
basis. 
D, I, OE Finding 1 
Finding 2 
D, I No issues 
 
Government Auditing Standards require that we consider information system controls “…to 
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to support the audit findings and conclusions.”
62 This 
process further involves determining whether the data that supports the audit objectives is 
reliable. In addition, Publication GAO-20-283G, Assessing Data Reliability, provides guidance 
for evaluating data using various tests of sufficiency and appropriateness when the data are 
integral to the audit objectives.
63 See our assessment in the Data Reliability section that follows. 
 
Our procedures to assess the design, implementation, and/or operating effectiveness accordingly 
are discussed in the Methodology section that follows. Deficiencies in internal controls we 
identified during the conduct of our audit and determined to be significant within the context of 
our audit objectives are summarized in the conclusion section below and described in detail 
within the respective audit findings in this audit report. See the table above for descriptions of 
each of the principle numbers included in the conclusions below.  
 
 
62 U.S. Government Accountability Office. Government Auditing Standards. 2018 Revision. Technical Update April 
2021. Paragraph 8.59 through 8.67. 
63 U.S. Government Accountability Office. Assessing Data Reliability. December 2019. 
===PAGE 69===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
62 
Conclusion for Objectives 1 and 2: 
 
Our assessment of DHS management’s internal controls did not find any issues associated with 
Principles 1 through 7, 9, and 11. We found, however, issues with management’s internal 
controls regarding Principles 8, 10, and 12 through 17. These areas include issues with 1) DHS’ 
lack of effectively monitoring pharmacy drug claims and 2) DHS’ lack of effectively monitoring 
PBM contracts. These issues are described in detail in Finding 1 and Finding 2.  
  
Conclusion for Objective 3: 
 
Our assessment of PerformRx’s management’s internal controls did not find issues associated 
with Principle 1 through 9, 11 through 14, and 17. We found, however, issues with 
management’s internal controls regarding Principles 10, 15 and 16. These areas include issues 
with PerformRx’ lack of sufficient transparency and disclosure of transmission fees to the 
respective MCOs and DHS. These issues are described in detail in Finding 3.  
 
 
Methodology 
 
The following planning procedures were performed to address all three of our audit objectives: 
 
• Identified those charged with governance and communicated an overview of the 
objectives, scope, methodology, and timing of the performance audit.  
 
• Obtained an understanding of DHS’ organizational structure, information published 
on its website, Enterprise Risk Management (ERM) Reports for FY 21/22 and FY 
22/23, DHS’ responses to our fraud questionnaires, responses to Information Systems 
Controls Assessment and Understanding of IT Environment forms, and from 
interviews with DHS management. [DHS – All Principles] 
 
• Obtained an understanding of PerformRx’s organizational structure, information 
published on its website, responses to our internal control and fraud questionnaires, 
responses to Information Systems Controls Assessment and Understanding of IT 
Environment forms, and from interviews with PerformRx management. [PerformRx – 
All Principles] 
 
===PAGE 70===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
63 
• Interviewed stakeholders of the pharmaceutical industry and distribution chain 
applicable to the Medicaid program. 
 
• Retained a consultant of external specialists with subject-matter expertise including 
knowledge of the pharmaceutical supply chain and pharmacy benefit manager 
activities. The consultant assisted with information as needed during audit planning, 
audit execution, and audit report writing.
64 See an informational memo written by the 
specialists in Appendix C of this audit report. 
 
• Reviewed the independence and qualifications of the specialists on the consultant’s 
team. 
 
• Reviewed the following laws and regulations applicable to the HealthChoices 
Medicaid Program: [Principle 12] 
 
o Act 120 of 2020 Human Services Code – Medical Assistance Pharmacy 
Services and Prescription Drub Pricing Study, 62 P.S. § 449 
o Act 98 of 2022 Human Services Code – Pharmacy Benefits Manager Audit 
and Obligations and Abrogating Regulations, 62 P.S. § 449.2 
o Act 77 of 2024, July 17, 2024  
o Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Title 42. Public Health Chapter IV. 
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, Department of Health and Human 
Services: 
 438.8 Medical loss ratio (MLR) standards. 
 438.66 State monitoring requirements. 
 438.230 Subcontractual relationships and delegation. 
 438.242 Health information systems. 
 438.364 External quality review results. 
 438.602 State responsibilities. 
 438.604 Data, information, and documentation that must be submitted. 
 438.818 Enrollee encounter data. 
o 55 Pa. Code: Human Services, Part III Medical Assistance Manual 
 Chapter 1101. General Provisions 
• Section 1101.73 Provider misutilization and abuse. 
 
64 GAGAS 1.27 p. defines Specialist as: “An individual or organization possessing special skill or knowledge in a 
particular field other than accounting or auditing that assists auditors in conducting engagements. A specialist may 
be either an internal specialist or an external specialist.”   
===PAGE 71===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
64 
 Chapter 1121. Pharmaceutical Services 
• Section 1121.42(1) Ongoing responsibilities of providers.  
• Section 1121.51 General payment policy. 
• Section 1121.71 Scope of claims review procedures.  
 Chapter 1229. Health Maintenance Organization Services 
• Section 1229.71 Scope of claims review procedures. 
 
• Designed audit procedures to provide reasonable assurance of detecting significant 
violations of law, regulations, policies, etc. in the context of our audit objectives. 
[Principle 12] 
 
• Obtained an understanding of DHS and PerformRx’s internal controls and assessed 
the design, implementation, and/or operating effectiveness of such internal controls to 
the extent necessary to address the audit objectives. [All Principles] 
 
• Evaluated the significance of identified internal control deficiencies within the 
context of our audit objectives. [All Principles] 
 
• Considered illegal acts, fraud, and abuse throughout the audit process. [All Principles] 
 
• Conducted fraud/abuse, audit risk, and control risk brainstorming meetings to 
highlight high risk areas and to be aware of situations in which fraud and control 
weaknesses may exist. [Principle 8] 
 
• Assessed significance and audit risk within the context of the audit objectives and 
applied these assessments to establish the scope and methodology for addressing the 
audit objectives. [All Principles] 
 
• Designed the audit procedures to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence that provided 
a reasonable basis for findings and conclusions based on the audit objectives and to 
reduce audit risk to an acceptably low level.  
 
• Planned audit procedures and test work based on ongoing risk assessments to obtain 
sufficient and appropriate evidence to adequately support our audit objectives.  
 
• We obtained information for the background of this audit report regarding Medicaid, 
the HealthChoices program, and PBMs. 
===PAGE 72===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
65 
The following procedures were performed to address Objective 1: 
 
Items selected for review for this objective were based on auditor’s professional judgment and 
not through statistical selection. The results of our review, therefore, cannot be projected to, and 
are not representative of, the corresponding populations. 
 
• Interviewed and corresponded with DHS management to gain an understanding of the 
program, bureaus and individuals involved in the program, internal control procedures, 
monitoring, and key reports that are significant to the audit objective. [Principles 8, 10, 
and 12 through 17] 
 
• Reviewed laws, regulations, DHS HealthChoices agreements with the MCOs, MCO 
contracts and amendments with PBMs, and the Prior Authorization Review Panel 
(PARP) to identify potential criteria needed to evaluate the audit objective.
65  
 
• Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), Center for Medicaid & CHIP 
Services (CMCS) Informational Bulletin regarding Medical Loss Ratio (MLR) 
Requirements Related to Third-Party Vendors, dated May 15, 2019.  
 
• Reviewed CMS’ State Toolkits for Validating Medicaid Managed Care Encounter Data, 
dated August 2019 and the revision dated September 2023. 
 
• Reviewed DHS’ instructions, data, and results for the following reports: 
 
 Report 4C Electronic Lag Report, Pharmacy Rebates (Report 4C) 
 Report 6B Pharmaceutical Price and Utilization Statistics  
 Report 6D Outpatient Drug Pricing Transparency Part D Report (Transparency 
Report) 
 NCPDP Timeliness and Accuracy reports, and  
 Drug Supplemental Files. 
 
• Reviewed the HealthChoices Data Books prepared by DHS’ actuaries for the calendar 
year 2022, 2023, 2024, and 2025 capitation rates to determine if the claims data used by 
the DHS actuaries to set the capitation rates included adjustments for PBM transmission 
fees. [Principle 15] 
 
65 We requested DHS’ policies and procedures for monitoring pharmacy encounter data; however, they only 
provided the PARP. 
===PAGE 73===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
66 
• Reviewed the Pennsylvania PROMISeTM Provider Handbook, Pennsylvania Department 
of Human Services, NCPDP D.0 Pharmacy Billing, which includes an overview of 
PROMISeTM for Pennsylvania’s claims processing for the Medicaid program, including 
HealthChoices. [Principles 12 and 13] 
 
• Documented an understanding of information technology general controls and data entry 
controls over PROMISe
TM, which included reviewing the PROMISeTM System and 
Organization Control (SOC) report and the most recent Peer Review Acceptance Letter 
for the company that conducted the review and provided the opinion. [Principle 11] 
 
• Performed the following procedures to determine if DHS verified whether PBMs 
complied with Act 120 of 2020, during calendar year 2022: 
 
 Obtained the October 2022 PROMISeTM HealthChoices pharmacy encounter 
data.66 For our audit procedures, we included in the audit population the four 
MCOs that did not use PerformRx as a PBM. This population included 1.5 
million pharmacy encounter records in PROMISeTM for HealthChoices, totaling 
$208 million. The three MCOs that used PerformRx are included in our audit 
procedures noted under Objective 3. 
 We haphazardly selected 10 encounter records for each of the four MCOs not 
tested for Objective 3, for a total of 40 encounters. We selected these 40 
encounter records based on the same 18 corporate pharmacies as selected for the 
60 selected claims processed by PerformRx as noted below. 
 Traced the encounter record information to the applicable pharmacy invoice and 
payment remittances to determine if the PBMs reported the amount the PBM paid 
the pharmacy and/or the amount the MCO paid the PBM in the encounter record. 
 Determined if the pharmacy was paid for the drug in accordance with the PBM 
and pharmacy contract provision. 
 Reviewed PROMISe
TM supplemental files and adjustments to review subsequent 
adjustments. 
 Determined if the PBMs charged transmission fees and whether the transmission 
fees were reported on the encounter record.  
[Principles 8, 10, and 12 through 17] 
 
 
66 See the Data Reliability section of this Appendix for details regarding assessment of data reliability. 
===PAGE 74===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
67 
• Reviewed the applicable provisions of the January 1, 2022 and September 1, 2022, DHS 
and MCOs HealthChoices agreement related to pharmacy claims and encounter data. 
[Principle 15] 
 
• Reviewed MCO audit report opinions and DHS letters to the MCOs regarding any 
deficiencies noted. MCO audit report opinions included opinions for the MCO’s annual 
financial statement audit and the MCO’s annual opinion for compliance with the DHS 
HealthChoices Guide. [Principles 16 and 17] 
 
• Reviewed CMS Medical Loss Ratio (MLR) requirements, guidance, related news articles 
to determine whether PBM transmission fees should be categorized as administrative 
costs or medical costs for the calculation of the annual MLR and for rate setting purposes. 
 
• Interviewed DHS outside actuarial vendor to determine if they considered the 
transmission fees charged by MCOs PBMs as administrative costs or medical costs for 
rate setting purposes.  
 
The following procedures were performed to address Objective 2: 
 
• Interviewed agency personnel to gain an understanding of the program, bureaus and 
individuals involved in the program, internal control procedures, and key reports that are 
significant to the audit objective. [Principles 8, 10, and 12 through 17] 
 
• Reviewed laws, regulations, DHS HealthChoices agreements with the MCOs, MCO 
contracts and amendments with PBMs, to identify potential criteria needed to evaluate 
the audit objective.
67  
 
• Reviewed contracts for CY 2022’s HealthChoices program, including the contracts 
between DHS and the MCOs, and the contracts between the MCOs and the PBMs to 
determine if the contract addresses Act 120 of 2020 requirements. [Principle 15] 
 
• Obtained the Statewide Preferred Drug List (PDL) and MCO PDL Compliance reports 
for the CY 2022 to determine if DHS monitors the adherence to and use of these lists. 
[Principle 16]
 
 
 
67 We requested DHS’ policies and procedures for monitoring pharmacy encounter data; however, they only 
provided the PARP. 
===PAGE 75===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
68 
• Interviewed DHS management to obtain an understanding of its monitoring procedures 
for the HealthChoices MCOs’ PBM contracts because DHS provided no written 
monitoring procedures. [Principles 10 and 12 through 17] 
 
• Determine if the MCOs completed the annual required Subcontractor Identification list 
(list) which listed the MCO’s subcontractors for the fiscal year. Initially, DHS provided 
the correct fiscal year annual lists for six out of eight MCOs for calendar year 2022. 
Upon receiving the eight correct lists we were able to ascertain that DHS gave us the 
incorrect PBM contracts for three MCOs. [Principle 16] 
 
• Determined if DHS completed a Subcontractor Checklist to ensure each of the eight 
MCOs’ PBM contracts complied with terms that are required to be in the HealthChoices 
agreement. DHS only provided checklists for five MCOs’ PBM contracts and indicated a 
checklist is not required for each HealthChoices agreement or each PBM contract unless 
the PBM is new to the program. Therefore, none of the MCOs completed the checklist in 
Appendix D of this report with the September 1, 2022 HealthChoices agreement to ensure 
the PBM contract still complies with the new HealthChoices agreement. [Principles 10, 
12, and 16] 
 
• Determine whether DHS monitors the System and Organization Controls (SOC) reports 
for MCOs and their subcontractors. DHS indicated it did not require or monitor MCO 
SOC reports until calendar year 2023 and they do not require or monitor the PBM SOC 
reports. [Principles 11 and 16] 
 
• Determine if DHS ensured the HealthChoices MCO contracts and PBM subcontracts 
have the required audit provision allowing DHS to audit the MCOs’ and PBMs’ 
Medicaid activities. [Principle 16] 
 
The following procedures were performed to address Objective 3: 
 
Items selected for review for this objective were based on auditor’s professional judgment and 
not through statistical selection. The results of our review, therefore, cannot be projected to, and 
are not representative of, the corresponding populations. 
 
• Interviewed PerformRx management to gain an understanding of the PBM role in the 
pharmacy claims process. [Principles 8, 10, and 12 through 17] 
 
===PAGE 76===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
69 
• Inquired of PerformRx about internal control procedures and key documents and reports 
that are significant to the audit objective. [Principle 10] 
 
• Obtained and reviewed various PerformRx policies and procedures pertaining to 
contracting and networking with pharmacies. [Principles 12 and 14] 
 
• Determined if PerformRx is following Act 120 of 2020 Section 449(h)(3) and (4) of the 
Human Services Code to determine whether each of the three MCOs’ contracts with 
PerformRx complied with provision (h)(3) and therefore does not charge or retain a 
differential at the time of claim adjudication, or if the contracts comply with provision 
(h)(4) and therefore do charge a transmission fee at the time of adjudication, that  the fee 
is disclosed and transparent in the contract.  
 
• Obtained Medicaid drug claims data from PerformRx’s claims processing system for the 
three HealthChoices MCOs for which it provides pharmacy services.
68 The total 
population of pharmacy claims we received from PerformRx’s claims processing system 
for the three MCOs for calendar year 2022 was 34 million pharmacy transactions, 
including claims, reversals and adjustments (claims) totaling $1.8 billion for the calendar 
year 2022. 
 
• Verified the claims data for calendar year 2022 reconciled to the outside vendor’s 
invoices that issues payments to the pharmacies. [Principle 13] 
 
• Performed the following procedures to determine if DHS verified whether PerformRx 
complied with Act 120 of 2020, during calendar year 2022: 
 
 Selected a test selection of claims from the CY 2022 claims data for the three 
MCOs that used PerformRx as a PBM. Since audit risk was assessed high, we 
judgmentally selected 60 claims to test. We selected 20 claims per MCO for a 
total of 60 claims to review. Each group of 20 claims included haphazardly 
selecting a claim per month and judgmentally selecting eight claims based on 
other criteria such as a claim that appeared to be an adjustment. The 60 claims 
were from 18 different corporate pharmacies.  
 Determined if the PBM charged a transmission fee causing spread pricing and 
whether the amount on the DHS encounter record is the amount the PBM paid the 
pharmacy less the transmission fee or the amount the MCO paid the PBM by 
 
68 See the Data Reliability section of this Appendix for details regarding assessment of data reliability. 
===PAGE 77===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
70 
tracing the claim’s record information to the applicable pharmacy invoice and 
payment remittance. [Principles 10, 15, and 16] 
 Determined if the pharmacy was paid for the drug in accordance with the PBM 
and pharmacy contract provision. [Principle 14] 
 Reviewed PROMISe
TM supplemental files and adjustments. [Principles 10, 15, 
and 16] 
 Confirmed the actual amounts paid with the applicable pharmacy. [Principles 10 
and 15] 
 
• Determine whether any transmission fees charged by PerformRx were reported to the 
three MCOs and DHS via the Transparency Reports. [Principles 15 and 17] 
 
• Reviewed the National Average Drug Acquisition Cost (NADAC) data compared to the 
testing items to ensure the PBM payments for drugs were reasonable. 
 
• Reviewed whether PerformRx’s administrative function of paying pharmacies for drugs 
distributed to Medicaid recipients is permitted to be outsourced to an entity in a non-
contiguous US state, such as Abarca, which is in Puerto Rico, a non-contiguous US state 
 
 
Data Reliability 
 
Government Auditing Standards requires us to assess the sufficiency and appropriateness of 
computer-processed information that we used to support our findings, conclusions, and 
recommendations. The assessment of the sufficiency and appropriateness of computer-processed 
information includes considerations regarding the completeness and accuracy of the data for the 
intended purposes.
69 
 
For audit Objective 1 regarding DHS monitoring of HealthChoices pharmacy encounter data, 
DHS provided October 2022 PROMISe
TM encounter records for the 7 HealthChoices MCOs.70 
In order to confirm the completeness and accuracy of the data, we performed the following: 
 
• Interviewed DHS management to document the PROMISe
TM information received from 
the MCOs for pharmacy claims.  
 
69 U.S. Government Accountability Office. Government Auditing Standards. 2018 Revisions. Technical Update 
April 2021. Paragraph 8.98. 
70 The eighth MCO, Aetna, was no longer in the HealthChoices program in October 2022.  
===PAGE 78===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
71 
• Documented an understanding of information system controls. 
 
• Compared each of the MCOs October 2022 total encounter records in PROMISeTM to 
applicable MCO-prepared reports. The reports utilized included NCPDP Timeliness and 
Accuracy reports. 
 
• Traced a selection of 40 DHS PROMISeTM encounter records (as described in 
Methodology for Objective 1) to the PBM’s claims processing transaction detail for the 
amount paid by the MCO to the PBM and the amount paid to the pharmacy on the PBM 
payment remittance less a transmission fee if charged by the PBM. 
 
In addition to the above procedures, as part of our overall process in obtaining assurance of the 
reliability of computer-processed information and data files, we obtained a management 
representation letter from DHS. This letter, signed by DHS management, included a 
confirmation statement indicating that the information provided to us had not been altered and 
was a complete and accurate duplication of the information from its original source.  
 
Based on the above procedures, we found no limitations with using the DHS PROMISe
TM 
pharmacy encounter data for our intended purposes. In accordance with Government Auditing 
Standards, we concluded the DHS pharmacy encounter data for the period January 1, 2022, 
through December 31, 2022, to be sufficiently reliable regarding completeness and accuracy for 
the purposes of this engagement. 
 
As part of our audit procedures for Objective 1, we used PBM claims information obtained from 
the applicable four MCOs that did not contract with PerformRx as their PBM for HealthChoices. 
The information obtained included pharmacy claims detail from the PBM’s claims processing 
system and payment remittances to pharmacies to determine if the PBMs were charging the 
pharmacies transmission fees, and if so, were the fees transparent to DHS based on the 
Transparency Reports and the pharmacies based on the payment remittances and confirmations, 
including whether the fees were recorded on the DHS PROMISeTM encounter record used for 
MCOs’ MLR calculations and future capitation rate setting. While we performed a comparison 
of the information in the PBM’s claims detail to the PBM’s payment remittance and to the 
PROMISe
TM encounter record, we did not assess the PBMs’ claims processing systems or 
payment remittances for completeness. Therefore, we consider the information to be data of 
undetermined reliability, as noted in Finding 1 of this audit report. This data was the best data 
available. Although this determination may affect the precision of the numbers presented in 
Finding 1, there is sufficient evidence to support our findings and conclusions. 
===PAGE 79===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
72 
Additionally, the Transparency Reports for calendar year 2022 provided by DHS were found to 
be incomplete (missing information), inconsistent (MCOs did not complete the reports like other 
MCOs), inaccurate (MCOs reported pharmacy fees as PBM paid fees), and misleading (MCOs 
reports made it appear as though the PBMs were practicing pass-through pricing, when in fact, 
they were practicing spread pricing.) Based on our discussion with DHS regarding the 
Transparency Reports not accurately reflecting the PBM transmission fees, DHS provided 15 
amended reports and additional information. We also found that the Report 4Cs indicate the 
PBMs were practicing pass-through pricing, when in fact, the seven of the eight MCOs’ PBMs 
were practicing spread pricing. We determined both of the reports to be of undetermined 
reliability. However, the reports were the best data provided by DHS. Although this 
determination may affect the precision of numbers we present, there is sufficient evidence in 
total to support our findings and conclusions. 
 
For Objective 3, we used pharmacy drug claims data provided by PerformRx which are 
maintained in PerformRx’s claim processing system for the three applicable HealthChoices 
MCOs for calendar year 2022. In order to confirm the completeness and accuracy of the data, we 
performed the following: 
 
• Interviewed PerformRx management to document the pharmacy claims processing 
procedures.  
 
• Obtained an understanding of PerformRx’s claim processing system including 
information technology general controls. 
 
• Compared the data files total amounts for each MCOs’ financial cycle for the 
calendar year 2022 to the applicable invoices sent to PerformRx’s vendor for payment 
processing.    
 
In addition to the above procedures described below, as part of our overall process in obtaining 
assurance of the reliability of computer-processed information and data files, we obtained a 
management representation letter from PerformRx. This letter, signed by PerformRx’s 
management, included a confirmation statement indicating that the information provided to us 
had not been altered and was a complete and accurate duplication of the information from its 
original source. 
 
Based on the above procedures, we found no limitations with using the PerformRx claims 
processing data for our intended purposes. In accordance with Government Auditing Standards, 
we concluded the PerformRx claims data, for the period January 1, 2022, through December 31, 
===PAGE 80===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
73 
2022, to be sufficiently reliable regarding completeness and accuracy for the purposes of this 
engagement. 
 
 
===PAGE 81===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
74 
Appendix B Definitions 
 
The following definitions are summarized as they relate to the pharmacy industry for the benefit 
of the reader of this audit report and are either based on definitions listed in the September 1, 
2022, Pennsylvania Department of Human Services (DHS) Physical HealthChoices 
(HealthChoices) Contract or other sources as noted.  
 
Actuarially Sound Capitation Rate – Projected rates determined by the Actuary and paid by 
DHS to the managed care organization (MCO) to provide reasonable, appropriate and attainable 
physical health services required under the terms of the HealthChoices contract. 
 
Actuary – An individual who meets the qualification standards established by the American 
Academy of Actuaries for an actuary and follows the practice standards established by the 
Actuarial Standards Board. In relation to this audit, Actuary refers to an individual or entity who 
is acting on behalf of the State when used in reference to the development and certification of the 
capitation rates. 
 
Adjudicated Claim – A claim that has been processed to payment or denial. 
 
Capitation – A payment DHS makes periodically to a MCO on behalf of each member enrolled 
under the HealthChoices contract and based on the actuarially sound rates for the provision of 
services in the program. DHS makes the payment regardless of whether an individual member 
receives services during the period covered by the payment. 
 
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) – The federal agency within the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services responsible for oversight of Medicaid programs. 
 
Claim – A bill from a Provider of a pharmacy service or product that is assigned a unique 
identifier (i.e., claim reference number).  
 
Covered Outpatient Drug – A brand name drug, a generic drug, or an over-the-counter drug 
which: 
1. Is approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 
2. Is distributed by a manufacturer that entered into a Federal Drug Rebate Program 
agreement with CMS. 
3. May be dispensed only upon prescription in the Medicaid program. 
===PAGE 82===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
75 
4. Has been prescribed or ordered by a licensed prescriber within the scope of the 
prescriber’s practice. 
5. Is dispensed or administered in an outpatient setting. 
 
Data Book – A document provided by the Actuary that describes the methodology of setting the 
capitation rates for the MCOs to provide physical health services for the HealthChoices program. 
 
Denied Claim – An Adjudicated Claim that does not result in a payment obligation to a 
Provider. 
 
DHS – The Pennsylvania Department of Human Services. 
 
Encounter – Any covered health care service provided to a member, regardless of whether the 
individual has an associated Claim. A pharmacy claim becomes an encounter when reported to 
the MCO in the National Council for Prescription Drug Program (NCPDP) format.  
 
Formulary – A DHS-approved list of outpatient drugs determined by the MCO’s Pharmacy and 
Therapeutics (P&T) Committee to have a significant, clinically meaningful therapeutic 
advantage in terms of safety, effectiveness, and cost for the MCO’s members. 
 
HealthChoices Program – The name of Pennsylvania’s Medicaid Managed Care program that 
provides mandatory managed health care to Recipients. 
 
HealthChoices Zone (Zone) – A multiple-county area in which the HealthChoices Program has 
been implemented to provide physical health services through mandatory managed care to 
Medicaid recipients in Pennsylvania. 
 
Internal Control Number – The unique number assigned by DHS to identify an individual 
Claim or Encounter. 
 
Managed Care Organization – An entity that contracts with the Commonwealth of 
Pennsylvania through DHS to provide managed care services for the Medicaid program. 
 
Medical Assistance – The Medical Assistance Program authorized by Title XIX of the federal 
Social Security Act, 42 U.S.C. §§1396 et seq., and regulations promulgated thereunder, and 62 
P.S. §§441.1 et seq. and regulations at 55 Pa. Code Chapters 1101 et seq. Medicaid is also 
referred to as Medical Assistance (MA) in Pennsylvania that pays for health care services for 
eligible individuals. 
===PAGE 83===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
76 
National Council for Prescription Drug Programs (NCPDP) – A not-for-profit organization 
that develops healthcare and pharmaceutical industry standards.  
 
Network – All contracted or employed Providers for the MCO who are providing covered 
services to Medicaid HealthChoices’ members. For purposes of this audit, a pharmacy network is 
the group of pharmacies a MCO allows its Medicaid members to use to fill prescriptions. 
 
Pass-Through Payment – A practice in which the PBM pays the pharmacy the same amount 
that the MCO paid the PBM for the same claim. The MCO pays the PBM for the services on a 
separate invoice.  
 
Physical Health Managed Care Organization – A risk-bearing entity which has an agreement 
with DHS to provide the physical health services under the HealthChoices program. 
 
Preferred Drug List – A list of DHS-approved outpatient drugs designated as preferred 
products because they were determined to have a significant, clinically meaningful therapeutic 
advantage in terms of safety, effectiveness and cost for the MCO members by the MCO’s P&T 
Committee. 
 
PROMISe
TM – The Provider Reimbursement and Operations Management Information System 
is a web-based application for registered providers and is a HIPAA-compliant claims processing 
and management information system.71 
 
 
 
71 http://dhs.pa.gov/about/Pages/Online-Services.aspx (last accessed April 9, 2024).  
===PAGE 84===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
77 
Appendix C Consultant Memo  
 
The Department of the Auditor General (DAG) contracted with an independent consultant, Three 
Axis Advisors, to prepare an informational memo on the dynamics of the Pharmacy Benefit 
Manager (PBM) industry and their impact on public programs. 
 
 
===PAGE 85===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
78 
 

===PAGE 86===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
79 
 

===PAGE 87===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
80 
 

===PAGE 88===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
81 
 

===PAGE 89===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
82 
Appendix D MCO Subcontractor Checklist 
 
The Pennsylvania Department of Human Services (DHS) created the following checklist that the 
managed care organizations (MCOs) are required to complete for new PBM contracts to ensure 
the MCO’s contract with the new PBM complies with the Physical HealthChoices agreement for 
the Physical HealthChoices Medicaid Program.  
 
MCOs are required to submit these reports upon contracting with a pharmacy benefit manager 
(PBM). At the time the original contract is submitted to DHS for approval, the full subcontract 
checklist in place at that time is completed, and a new checklist is not completed again unless the 
MCO contracts with a different PBM. See Finding 2 regarding DHS’ inadequate monitoring of 
PBM contracts. 
 
Subcontractor Checklist 
 
MCO shall complete the checklist indicating the location that the requirement is included or met. 
Number 
HealthChoices 
Agreement 
Reference 
Requirement Requirement Met? 
All subcontracts 
1 Exhibit II, Section 
XIII Confidentiality 
The specific activities and report responsibilities delegated to 
the subcontractor.  
2 Exhibit II, Section 
XIII Confidentiality 
A provision for revoking delegation or imposing other 
sanctions if the subcontractor’s performance is inadequate.  
3 Exhibit II, Section 
XIII Confidentiality 
All subcontractors shall comply with all applicable 
requirements of the Agreement between the PH-MCO and 
the Department concerning the HealthChoices Program. 
 
4 Exhibit II, Section 
XIII Confidentiality 
Meet the applicable requirements of 42 CFR Subsection 
434.6.  
5 Exhibit II, Section 
XIII Confidentiality Include nondiscrimination provisions.  
6 Exhibit II, Section 
XIII Confidentiality 
Include the provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act 
(42 U.S.C. Section 12101 et seq).  
===PAGE 90===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
83 
Number 
HealthChoices 
Agreement 
Reference 
Requirement Requirement Met? 
7 Exhibit II, Section 
XIII Confidentiality 
Contain a provision in all subcontracts with any individual 
firm, corporation, or any other entity which provides 
medical services and receives reimbursement from the 
PH-MCO either directly or indirectly through capitation, 
that data for all services provided will be reported timely 
to the PH-MCO. Penalties and sanctions will be imposed 
for failure to comply. The data is to be included in the 
utilization and encounter data provided to the Department 
in the format. 
 
8 Exhibit II, Section 
XIII Confidentiality 
Contain a provision in all subcontracts with any individual, 
firm, corporation, or any other entity which provides medical 
services to HealthChoices members, that the subcontractor 
will report all new third party resources to the PH-MCO 
identified through the provision of medical services, which 
previously did not appear on the Department's recipient 
information files provided to the PH-MCO. 
 
9 Exhibit II, Section 
XIII Confidentiality 
Contain a hold harmless clause that stipulates that the 
PH-MCO subcontractor agrees to hold harmless the 
Commonwealth, all Commonwealth officers and 
employees, and all PH-MCO members in the event of 
nonpayment by the PH-MCO to the subcontractor. The 
subcontractor shall further indemnify and hold harmless 
the Commonwealth and their agents, officers and 
employees against all injuries, death, losses, damages, 
claims, suits, liabilities, judgments, costs and expenses 
which may in any manner accrue against the 
Commonwealth or their agents, officers or employees, 
through the intentional conduct, negligence or omission of 
the subcontractor, its agents, officers, employees or the 
PH-MCO. 
 
10 Exhibit II, Section 
XIII Confidentiality 
Contain a provision in all subcontracts that the 
subcontractor agrees to comply with all applicable 
Medicaid, federal and state laws and regulations; 
including sub-regulatory guidance. 
 
11 Exhibit II, Section 
XIII Confidentiality 
Contain provisions in all subcontracts with any individual 
firm, corporation or any other entity which provides 
medical services to HealthChoices members, that 
prohibits gag clauses which limit the subcontractor from 
disclosure of medical necessary or appropriate health 
care information or alternate therapies to members, other 
health care professionals or the Department. 
 
===PAGE 91===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
84 
Number 
HealthChoices 
Agreement 
Reference 
Requirement Requirement Met? 
12 Exhibit II, Section 
XIII Confidentiality 
Contain provisions in all employee contracts prohibiting 
gag clauses which limit said employees from the 
disclosure of information pertaining to the HealthChoices 
Program. 
 
13 Exhibit II, Section 
XIII Confidentiality 
Contain provisions in all subcontracts with any individual, 
firm, corporation or any other entity which provides 
medical services to HealthChoices members, that limits 
incentives to those permissible under the applicable 
Federal regulation. 
 
14 Exhibit II, Section 
XIII Confidentiality 
Contain a provision in all subcontracts that the 
Department has ready access to any and all documents 
and records of transactions pertaining to the provision of 
services to Medical Assistance consumers. 
 
15 Exhibit II, Section 
XIII Confidentiality 
Contain a provision that the PH-MCO and its 
subcontractor(s) must agree to maintain books and 
records relating to the HealthChoices Program services 
and expenditures, including reports to the Department 
and source information used in preparation of these 
reports. These records include but are not limited to 
financial statements, records relating to quality of care, 
medical records and prescription files. 
 
16 Exhibit II, Section 
XIII Confidentiality 
Contain a provision that the PH-MCO and its 
subcontractor(s) must agree to comply with all standards 
for practice and medical records keeping specified by the 
Commonwealth. 
 
===PAGE 92===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
85 
Number 
HealthChoices 
Agreement 
Reference 
Requirement Requirement Met? 
17 Exhibit II, Section 
XIII Confidentiality 
Contain a provision that the PH -MCO and its 
subcontractor(s) and the subcontractor’s contractor(s) 
shall, at their own expense, make all books, records, 
contracts, computers, or other electronic systems 
available for audit, review, evaluation or inspection by the 
Commonwealth, its designated representatives, CMS, the 
HHS Inspector General, the Comptroller General or their 
designees. Access must be granted either on- site, 
electronically or through the mail at the discretion of the 
reviewing entity. The right to audit exists for ten (10) years 
from the final date of the contract period; or from the date 
of completion of any audit, whichever is longer. 
 
The PH-MCO must fully cooperate with any and all reviews 
and/or audits by state or federal agencies or their agents, 
such as the Independent Assessment Contractor, by 
assuring that appropriate employees and involved parties 
are available for interviews relating to reviews or audits. All 
records to be sent by mail shall be sent to the requesting 
entity in the form of accurate, legible paper copies, unless 
otherwise indicated, within fifteen (15) calendar days of 
such request and at no expense to the requesti ng entity. 
Such requests made by the Commonwealth shall not be 
unreasonable 
 
18 Exhibit II, Section 
XIII Confidentiality 
Requirement for subcontractor(s) must agree to retain the 
source records for its data reports for a minimum of seven 
years and must have written policies and procedures for 
storing this information. 
 
19 Exhibit II, Section 
XIII Confidentiality 
A provision that subcontractor recognize that payments 
made to the subcontractor are derived from federal and 
state funds. Additionally, the PH-MCO shall require, as a 
written provision in all contracts for services rendered to 
Recipient, that the subcontractor shall be held civilly and/or 
criminally liable to both the PH-MCO and the Department, 
in the event of nonperformance, misrepresentation, fraud, 
or abuse. A clause notifying subcontractors of the 
prohibition and sanctions for the submission of false claims 
and statements. 
 
20 Exhibit II, Section 
XIII Confidentiality 
A provision that subcontractor cooperate with Quality 
Management/Utilization Management Program 
requirements. 
 
===PAGE 93===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
86 
Number 
HealthChoices 
Agreement 
Reference 
Requirement Requirement Met? 
Medical Services Subcontracts 
21 
Section XII 
Subcontractual 
Relationships 
A requirement for the submission of all Encounter Data 
for services provided within the time frames required in 
Section VIII, Reporting Requirements, no matter whether 
reimbursement for these services is made by the PH-
MCO either directly or indirectly through capitation. 
 
22 
Section XII 
Subcontractual 
Relationships 
Language which ensures compliance with all applicable 
federal and state laws.  
23 
Section XII 
Subcontractual 
Relationships 
Language which prohibits gag clauses which would limit 
the subcontractor from disclosure of Medically Necessary 
or appropriate health care information or alternative 
therapies to Members, other Health Care Providers, or to 
the Department. 
 
24 
Section XII 
Subcontractual 
Relationships 
A requirement that ensures that the Department has ready 
access to any and all documents and records of 
transactions pertaining to the provision of services to 
Recipients. 
 
25 
Section XII 
Subcontractual 
Relationships 
The definition of Medically Necessary as outlined in 
Section II of this Agreement, Definitions. (Not included in 
above “All Subcontracts” checklist.) 
 
26 
Section XII 
Subcontractual 
Relationships 
The PH-MCO must ensure, when applicable, that its 
Subcontracts adhere to the standards for Network 
composition and adequacy. (Not included in above “All 
Subcontracts” checklist.) 
 
27 
Section XII 
Subcontractual 
Relationships 
The PH-MCO must ensure, when applicable, compliance 
with the requirements of Section V.B.1, General Prior 
Authorization Requirements for Subcontracts for 
utilization review services. (Not included in above “All 
Subcontracts” checklist.) 
 
===PAGE 94===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
87 
Number 
HealthChoices 
Agreement 
Reference 
Requirement Requirement Met? 
28 
Section XII 
Subcontractual 
Relationships 
Contain a provision for a transition plan for Subcontracts 
with an entity to provide any information systems. This 
transition plan must include information on how the data, 
including all historical Claims and service data shall be 
converted and made available to a new Subcontractor. 
 
The PH-MCO must make all necessary revisions to its 
Subcontracts to be in compliance with the requirements 
set forth in Section XIII.A, Compliance with Program 
Standards. The PH-MCO must make revisions as 
contracts and Subcontracts become due for renewal 
provided that all contracts and Subcontracts are 
amended within one (1) year of execution of this 
Agreement with the exception of the Encounter Data 
requirements, which must be amended immediately, if 
necessary, to comply with Encounter Data to the PH-
MCO within the time frames specified in Section VIII.B, 
Systems Reports. (Not included in above “All 
Subcontracts” checklist.) 
 
 
===PAGE 95===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
88 
 
Appendix E Medical Loss Ratio  
 
The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) provides guidance on calculation and 
reporting standards for the Medical Loss Ratio (MLR).
72 The MLR is a key metric used in 
Medicaid managed care to calculate the amount of funding that was used for medical costs 
versus administrative costs spent by a managed care organization (MCO) or the MCO’s third 
party vendors, like a PBM.73   
 
The Pennsylvania Department of Human Services contracted with the MCOs effective January 1, 
2022 and effective September 1, 2022 and required a MLR at or above 88 percent or the 
subsequent year’s capitation rates are adjusted based on the following as outlined in the 
Appendix 3b of the MCO agreement titled: Medical Loss Ratio Reporting and Remittance 
Requirements: 
 
D. Medical Loss Ratio (MLR) Reduction 
 
A reduction to revenue will be applied to Base Capitation Rates for [physical 
health] MCOs that have reported a total, inclusive of [sic] both the Newly Eligible 
and all other populations MLRs, MLR below 88 percent (88.00%) on the most 
recently submitted MLR Report, as required in Appendix 3h. The reduction 
applied will be based on the following schedule: 
 
• MLR below 85.00% will result in a 1.50% reduction 
• MLR greater than or equal to 85.00% but less than 86.00% will result in a 
0.50% reduction 
• MLR greater than or equal to 86.00% but less than 87.00% will result in a 
0.25% reduction 
• MLR greater than or equal to 87.00% but less than 88.00% will result in a 
0.125% reduction 
 
72 See 42 CFR 438.8 for information regarding the MLR calculations. 
73 A transmission fee paid by a pharmacy to a PBM and retained by the PBM as another source of profit on its 
claims processing, is an administrative cost, and not a medical cost for purposes of calculating the MCO’s MLR. 
Additionally, “states are responsible for ensuring that managed care plans are complying with these MLR 
requirements and should be routinely auditing reported data and MLR calculations to ensure that revenues, 
expenditures, and other amounts are appropriately identified…” according to CMS in its 2019 guidance at CIB: 
Medical Loss Ratio (MLR) Requirements Related to Third-Party Vendors (medicaid.gov) ( last accessed June 28, 
2024). 
===PAGE 96===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
89 
 
The Department will apply the MLR Reduction, per the schedule above, based on 
the following calculation to determine the MLR Reduction Amount: 
 
   Base Capitation Rate 
MINUS  MCO Assessment Amount 
MINUS  Provider Pay for Performance Amount 
EQUALS  Amount Subject to MLR Reduction 
MULTIPLIED BY MLR Reduction Percentage 
EQUALS  MLR Reduction Amount 
 
The MLR Reduction Percentage, on the schedule above, is limited to a percentage 
that would result in Base Capitation Rates that are not lower than the lower bound 
Base Capitation Rates before Risk Adjustment as provided to the [physical health] 
MCOs in Section II.B above. If this limitation is necessary, [DHS] will notify the 
[physical health] MCO of the MLR Reduction Percentage that was used to 
determine the applicable Reduction Amount above. 
 
 
===PAGE 97===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
90 
 
Appendix F PerformRx Test Results for a Selection of 60 Claims From 
its Claims Processing System  
 
The following table illustrates our 60 drug claims tested for Objective 3 as stated in the 
Introduction and Background section to determine if PerformRx, LLC complied with 62 P.S. 
§449(h)(3) and (4) of the Human Services Code (as amended by Act 120 of 2020) regarding fees 
imposed on the pharmacies compared to the corresponding amounts billed to the applicable 
Physical HealthChoices managed care organizations and recorded on the Pennsylvania 
Department of Human Services’ Provider Reimbursement and Operations Management 
Information System. (See PerformRx, LLC Finding 3 for more information on this objective, our 
selection of claims, and test results.) 
 
Item # MCO 
Plan Paid 
Amount 
Payment 
Verified 
with 
Contract 
Terms 
Paid, In-
cycle, or 
Out-of-cycle 
Transaction 
MCO 
Payment 
Agreed to 
PBM 
Payment to 
Pharmacy 
Pharmacy 
Payment 
Agreed to 
PROMISeTM 
1 MCO1 $411.85 √ P E-1 E-2 
2 MCO1 $12,457.72 √ P E-1 E-2 
3 MCO1 $6,441.26 √ P E-1 E-2 
4 MCO1 $6.68 √ P E-1 E-2 
5 MCO1 $11,118.71 √ P E-1 E-2 
6 MCO1 $32.01 √ I N/A N/A 
7 MCO1 $27.88 √ P E-1 E-2 
8 MCO1 $11,460.03 √ P √ √ 
9 MCO1 $27.37 √ I N/A N/A 
10 MCO1 $12,352.20 √ P E-1 E-2 
11 MCO1 $222.50 √ P E-1 E-2 
12 MCO1 $34.08 √ P E-1 E-2 
13 MCO1 $(73.44) √ I N/A N/A 
14 MCO1 $14.22 √ P E-1 E-2 
15 MCO1 $(1,279.50) √ O √ √ 
16 MCO1 $40.47 √ P E-1 E-2 
17 MCO1 $(6,024.15) √ O E-1 E-2 
===PAGE 98===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
91 
 
Item # MCO 
Plan Paid 
Amount 
Payment 
Verified 
with 
Contract 
Terms 
Paid, In-
cycle, or 
Out-of-cycle 
Transaction 
MCO 
Payment 
Agreed to 
PBM 
Payment to 
Pharmacy 
Pharmacy 
Payment 
Agreed to 
PROMISeTM 
18 MCO1 $(15.41) √ I N/A N/A 
19 MCO1 $166.75 √ P E-1 E-2 
20 MCO1 $(40.00) √ O √ √ 
21 MCO2 $8.88 √ P E-1 E-2 
22 MCO2 $8.07 √ P E-1 E-2 
23 MCO2 $3.58 √ P E-1 E-2 
24 MCO2 $6.47 √ P E-1 E-2 
25 MCO2 $7.24 √ P E-1 E-2 
26 MCO2 $81.24 √ P E-1 E-2 
27 MCO2 $11.30 √ P E-1 E-2 
28 MCO2 $879.04 √ P E-1 E-2 
29 MCO2 $10.42 √ O E-1 E-2 
30 MCO2 $1,474.21 √ I N/A N/A 
31 MCO2 $9.76 √ P E-1 E-2 
32 MCO2 $433.94 √ P E-1 E-2 
33 MCO2 $73.89 √ P E-1 E-2 
34 MCO2 $21.76 √ P E-1 E-2 
35 MCO2 $(553.43) √ I N/A N/A 
36 MCO2 $(996.00) √ I N/A N/A 
37 MCO2 $(760.30) √ O E-1 E-3 
38 MCO2 $(12.68) √ O E-1 E-2 
39 MCO2 $5,949.76 √ P E-1 E-2 
40 MCO2 $58.50 √ P E-1 E-2 
41 MCO3 $11.76 √ P E-1 E-2 
42 MCO3 $6.55 √ P E-1 E-2 
43 MCO3 $41.35 √ I N/A N/A 
44 MCO3 $6.38 √ P E-1 E-2 
45 MCO3 $9.33 √ I N/A N/A 
===PAGE 99===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
92 
 
Item # MCO 
Plan Paid 
Amount 
Payment 
Verified 
with 
Contract 
Terms 
Paid, In-
cycle, or 
Out-of-cycle 
Transaction 
MCO 
Payment 
Agreed to 
PBM 
Payment to 
Pharmacy 
Pharmacy 
Payment 
Agreed to 
PROMISeTM 
46 MCO3 $48.53 √ P E-1 E-2 
47 MCO3 $7.00 √ O E-1 E-2 
48 MCO3 $347.10 √ P E-1 E-2 
49 MCO3 $15.05 √ P E-1 E-2 
50 MCO3 $10,679.77 √ O E-1 E-2 
51 MCO3 $254.49 √ P E-1 E-2 
52 MCO3 $2,038.91 √ P E-1 E-2 
53 MCO3 $313.32 √ P E-1 E-2 
54 MCO3 $459.87 √ I N/A N/A 
55 MCO3 $(76.72) √ I N/A N/A 
56 MCO3 $(7,573.59) √ I N/A N/A 
57 MCO3 $(398.09) √ O E-1 E-2 
58 MCO3 $(12,457.72) √ I N/A N/A 
59 MCO3 $12.15 √ P E-1 E-2 
60 MCO3 $359.00 √ P √ √ 
P Claim is a paid claim with no adjustments at the time the data was pulled from PerformRx’s claims processing 
system. 
O Out-of-cycle adjusted claim is a claim with an original claim paid and processed in one financial cycle with a 
subsequent claim in a different financial cycle to void the first transaction in the claims processing system and 
PROMISeTM. 
I In-cycle adjusted claim is a claim adjusted within the claims processing system in the same financial cycle, and 
therefore, there is no remittance advices or PROMISeTM encounter record. For these in-cycle adjusted claims, we 
confirmed there were no PROMISeTM encounter records and marked the procedures for payments N/A. 
√ Audit step completed with no exceptions. 
E-1 The claims detail from the claims processing system listed the MCO paid amount as more than the PBM paid 
amount on the remittance advice to the pharmacy due to a transmission fee charged. 
E-2 The PBM remittance advice of amount paid to the pharmacy was less than the amount recorded on PROMISe TM. 
E-3 PROMISeTM did not show the reversing transaction as processed to net the original claim amount to zero. 
According to PerformRx, the claim was rejected by PROMISeTM, and therefore, the reversal was not processed 
through in PROMISeTM which in turn overstated the encounter data. 
Source: This table was created by the Pennsylvania Department of Auditor General staff using documentation 
provided by PerformRx and DHS. 
 
===PAGE 100===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
93 
 
Appendix G Distribution List 
 
This audit report was distributed to the following individuals: 
 
The Honorable Josh Shapiro 
Governor 
 
The Honorable Valerie A. Arkoosh, MD, 
MPH 
Secretary 
Pennsylvania Department of Human 
Services 
 
Mr. David R. Bryan, CPA, CGMA 
Manager, Audit Resolution Section 
Bureau of Financial Operations 
Pennsylvania Department of Human 
Services 
 
Ms. Amy Harron, CPA 
Audit Specialist 3, Audit Resolution Section 
Bureau of Financial Operations 
Pennsylvania Department of Human 
Services 
 
Mr. Jim Gartner, MBA, R.Ph. 
President 
PerformRx, LLC 
 
Mr. Matthew McGrath 
Manager, Audit & Quality 
PerformRx, LLC 
 
Ms. Cheryl A. Monkman, CIA, CRMA 
Vice President, Corporate Audit 
AmeriHealth Caritas 
 
The Honorable Scott Martin 
Senate Majority Appropriations Chairman 
Pennsylvania Senate 
 
The Honorable Vincent Hughes 
Senate Minority Appropriations Chairman 
Pennsylvania Senate 
 
The Honorable Jordan Harris 
House Majority Appropriations Chairman 
Pennsylvania House of Representatives 
 
The Honorable Seth Grove 
House Minority Appropriations Chairman 
Pennsylvania House of Representatives 
 
The Honorable Kim Ward 
President Pro-Tempore 
Pennsylvania Senate 
 
The Honorable Joanna McClinton 
Speaker of the House 
Pennsylvania House of Representatives 
 
The Honorable Matt Bradford 
House Majority Leader 
Pennsylvania House of Representatives 
===PAGE 101===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
94 
 
The Honorable Bryan Cutler 
House Minority Leader 
Pennsylvania House of Representatives 
 
The Honorable Joe Pittman 
Senate Majority Leader 
Pennsylvania Senate 
 
The Honorable Jay Costa 
Senate Minority Leader 
Pennsylvania Senate 
 
The Honorable Dan Frankel 
House Health Majority Chair 
Pennsylvania House of Representatives 
 
The Honorable Kathy L. Rapp 
House Health Minority Chair 
Pennsylvania House of Representatives 
 
The Honorable Doyle Heffley 
House Human Services Minority Chair 
Pennsylvania House of Representatives 
 
The Honorable Imogen Wright 
Executive Director, House Human Services 
Pennsylvania House of Representatives 
 
The Honorable Michele Brooks 
Senate Health & Human Services Chair 
Pennsylvania Senate 
 
The Honorable Arthur L. Haywood 
Senate Health & Human Services Minority 
Chair 
Pennsylvania Senate 
 
The Honorable Judy Ward 
Senate Health & Human Services Vice 
Chair 
Pennsylvania Senate 
 
The Honorable Valerie S. Gaydos 
Representative 
Pennsylvania House of Representatives 
 
The Honorable Jessica Benham 
Representative 
Pennsylvania House of Representatives 
 
The Honorable Uri Monson 
Secretary of the Budget 
Office of the Budget 
 
The Honorable Stacy Garrity 
State Treasurer 
Pennsylvania Treasury Department 
 
The Honorable Michelle A. Henry 
Attorney General  
Office of the Attorney General 
 
The Honorable Neil Weaver 
Secretary of Administration  
Office of Administration 
 
Mr. William Canfield  
Director  
Bureau of Audits  
Office of Comptroller Operations 
 
Ms. Mary Spila 
Collections/Cataloging 
State Library of Pennsylvania 
 
===PAGE 102===
 
 A Performance Audit 
  
 Pennsylvania Department of Human Services 
 PerformRx, LLC 
  
 Pharmacy Benefit Manager Services for the Physical 
HealthChoices Medicaid Program 
in Pennsylvania 
  
 
95 
 
This report is a matter of public record and is available online at www.PaAuditor.gov. Media 
questions about the report can be directed to the Pennsylvania Department of the Auditor 
General, Office of Communications, 229 Finance Building, Harrisburg, PA 17120; via email to: 
news@PaAuditor.gov
. 
 